In fiscal year 1983, the Department of Labor demonstrated that better management of its programs and resources resulted in improved protections and additional services for American workers.
The process of reevaluation and restructuring begun three years ago has enabled the Department to move expeditiously toward implementing major worker-protection initiatives this past year.
Implementation of the Job Training Partnership Act, developed with the cooperation of Congress, which represents a new approach to the Department's employment and training programs.
Improved safety and health protection for workers through cooperative efforts by employers, government and workers.
Establishment of a base within government to assist employers and unions in developing cooperative programs to meet the challenges of a changing world economy.
At the same time, the Department instituted new measures to improve its own administration.
The goal was greater operational effectiveness, with reduced costs.
During the past year the Department recorded new gains in combatting fraud and mismanagement in departmental programs, as well as in employee pension and benefit plans.
Increased administrative efficiency and cost-effectiveness were emphasized by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM) in fiscal 1983.
In its role of providing financial management, travel administration, space and personnel utilization, and other support services, OASAM was guided by the goals of the President's management improvement initiative, Reform '88, as well as other Presidential and congressional mandates.
In order to control escalating personnel costs, OASAM used a comprehensive monitoring system, developed to ensure that position management and classification procedures within each agency follow prescribed rules and regulations.
As a result, 16 new position classification standards were implemented, affecting more than 4,000 positions in the Department of Labor.
OASAM assumed responsibility this past year for managing the Frances Perkins Building, utilizing a combination of in-house expertise and contractor services to provide more efficient and costeffective operation and maintenance of our national headquarters building.
For example, an energy management program resulted in savings of $480,000, and a space reduction plan saved over $3.6 million.
Also, the Department's personal property inventory was reduced by 900 items, and telecommunications management was improved.
On October 1, 1983, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) implemented the new Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), signed into law in October 1982 by President Reagan.
JTPA represents an historic new approach to the Department's employment and training policies.
ETA in cooperation with the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, established 595 Private Industry Councils (PIC's) across the country.
They will play an important role in developing local training programs to provide for the employment needs of private employers.
Other features of the new system include basic changes in the operation of the U. S. Employment Service and State Job Service agencies and establishment of a new job training program under title III for dislocated workers.
By eliminating income maintenance and subsidies for public service jobs, JTPA places the training emphasis where it belongs, in partnership with the private sector.
At the same time the Act expands the roles of State and local agencies in employment and training programs, while retaining certain oversight responsibilities for the Federal government.
For example, the Office of Performance Management was established within ETA to develop fair and equitable standards to ensure the success of JTPA.
Under JTPA, 70 cents of every training dollar will go for actual training activities compared with 18 cents under the former Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA).
Under JTPA, 1 million of the hard core unemployed will be trained each year.
JTPA targets three groups most in need: economically disadvantaged youths, welfare recipients and dislocated workers.
During fiscal 1983, ETA continued to administer CETA while establishing the foundation for full implementation of JTPA.
CETA was officially phased out on October 1, 1983.
To ensure effective program integrity under JTPA, ETA concentrated on improving its resource management and worked to eliminate fraud, waste, and abuse by strengthening its oversight activities, audit programs and field assistance.
Passage of the Emergency Veterans' Job Training Act of 1983 and implementation of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) were important developments that will help unemployed veterans find employment.
The Emergency Veterans' Job Training Act of 1983 is an Administration effort and commitment to encourage employers to hire and train long-term unemployed Korean-conflict and Vietnam-era veterans.
This landmark program is administered jointly by the Department and the Veterans Administration to provide employers reimbursement for up to $10,000 of starting wages paid to eligible veterans.
In fiscal 1984, for the first time, governors and local officials in each State may apply for grants to conduct job training and placement programs for veterans in their communities.
These programs, authorized under title IV of JTPA, offer a creative and effective approach to meeting the needs of service-connected disabled veterans, Vietnam-era veterans, and veterans recently separated from military service.
During fiscal 1983, the Department continued to emphasize cooperation, rather than confrontation, to improve worker safety and health.
Both the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) increased services and assistance to employers and employees, which resulted in significant statistical improvements of worker safety and health measures in workplaces covered by both agencies.
Current BLS statistics indicate a continuing decline in the rate of on-the-job injuries and illnesses to their lowest levels ever.
OSHA established a program to assist employers in evaluating their potential safety and health problems.
More than 20 agreements were signed during the fiscal year between OSHA and companies meeting the criteria of its new Voluntary Protection Programs, established in July 1983.
The agency also offered training to employers and employees to encourage preventive measures in establishing safe and healthful workplaces; the number completing courses at the OSHA Training Institute during the year was 6,792, compared with 4,389 during fiscal 1982.
These policies have helped reduce the rate of on-the-job injuries and illnesses by 11.5 percent since 1980.
Statistics for employers covered by the Occupational Safety and Health Act are based on the Annual Survey of Öccupational Injuries and Illnesses, which covers calendar, not fiscal years.
In calendar 1982, the latest year for which statistics are available, job-related injuries and illnesses fell by 0.6 percent from 8.3 to 7.7 percent, the lowest incidence rates since the Bureau of Labor Statistics began gathering these figures.
Statistics for the 1983 calendar year will be compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics during the 1984 calendar year, based on records kept by employers to meet legal requirements during 1983.
Mine Safety and Health Administration actions have also emphasized a cooperative approach by stressing education and training and engineering assistance by MSHA to both management and labor.
This assistance was provided to 217 mines with accident rates higher than the national average during fiscal 1983.
Cooperative efforts by industry, labor and government allowed for dramatic improvement in both coal and noncoal mining injury rates.
In 1980, the rate for all injuries was 10.03 per 200,000 hours of worker exposure in coal mining and 6.46 in noncoal mining; in the first 9 months of 1983, the rates were 6.98 and 4.37, respectively.
That represents a reduction of more than 30 percent for coal mining and 32 percent for noncoal mining.
Fatality rates for coal mining were the lowest since statistics have been kept and have never been lower for noncoal mining.
We continued to emphasize cooperation between labor and management in both the private and public sectors.
The Labor-Management Services Administration (LSMA), in cooperation with the American Federation of Government Employees and the National Union of Compliance Officers, established a voluntary labormanagement cooperation program designed to increase the effectiveness of agency programs by improving internal communication and utilizing ‘"participation circles."These circles allow employees and management to better understand each other's problems and to develop appropriate solutions through cooperative efforts.
The circles were established in 12 field offices, as well as in the national office and have been operating effectively since fiscal 1982.
LMSA's Division of Cooperative Labor-Management Programs used a variety of strategies to enhance public awareness of the cooperative approach.
Five symposiums on cooperative labormanagement programs were held throughout fiscal 1983.
The Southeast Regional Symposium was attended by 47 leaders from labor, business, government and the academic community.
LMSA published several reports on labor-management cooperation to guide employers and employees in developing useful approaches to problem solving.
The Resource Guide to Labor-Management Cooperation, for example, includes listings of more than 200 in-plant cooperative programs.
This 198-page directory identifies cooperative programs which are in operation throughout the Nation and provides other sources of information for employers, unions and others interested in developing their own employee participation programs as a means of coping with changing world economic conditions.
One of LMSA's priorities has been to increase its protection of the pension funds of union members through an aggressive program of adults and investigations.
To combat the misuse of union funds, LMSA has developed a targeting system to identify those cases most likely to involve major civil and criminal violations.
As a result, more than 1,395 audits and embezzlement investigations were conducted during this fiscal year, compared with 1,275 audits and investigations during fiscal 1982.
This year brought a victory in the Department's ongoing effort to protect the approximately $5 billion in assets of the Teamsters' Central States Pension Fund from fraud or other illegal misuse.
An agreement was reached, settling outstanding claims against the current trustees of the pension fund and the Central States Health and Welfare Fund.
The settlement was the largest ever obtained under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) and provided the means for the Department to recover the $6.5 million wrongfully taken from fund participants and beneficiaries.
This settlement was the culmination of 2 years'negotiations; through the Department of Labor's hard work and determination, the rights and benefits of a half million participants and beneficiaries of both funds were made more secure than ever before.
The settlement reflected the Department's commitment to safeguard the pensions and other benefits of American workers.
The legislative and administrative reforms of the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) in fiscal 1983 resulted in greater protection of workers and a reduced paperwork burden on employers.
The Wage and Hour Division implemented the Reagan Administration's Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, which eliminates many of the burdensome features of the former law and has improved protections for farmworkers by ensuring that workers are protected whether they are employed by crew leaders or agricultural employers or associations.
Although agricultural employers are no longer required to register like crew leaders or farm labor contractors, they must now comply with all provisions of the Act protecting workers, including safety and health standards for housing and vehicles, advance disclosure of wages, hours and working conditions and itemized earnings statements for each pay period.
Another departmental success was the improvement of the black lung benefits program.
Although bankruptcy had threatened the program since the 1977 amendments, the implementation of changes to the Black Lung Benefits Act in fiscal 1983 now ensure sound financing and financial management for the future.
The Administration's new Act provides stricter eligibility requirements, an increase in the excise tax on coal and shifting of liability for payments in certain cases from mine operators to the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
Such cases include those approved under the liberalized criteria of the 1977 amendments which involve unanticipated liability either by the operator or the operator's insurance carrier.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics has continued to improve the quality and usefulness of its basic economic statistics.
Significant changes were made in price and productivity measures.
The home ownership component of the Consumer Price Index, one of the Nation's most widely watched economic indicators, was changed to reflect more accurately the cost of shelter.
A new series of multifactor productivity measures was introduced, and the Producer Price Index program was modernized and expanded.
The Armed Forces were added to the labor force data this past fiscal year to achieve a more accurate measure of employment, although BLS continues to publish civilian employment data.
The Women's Bureau vigorously promoted increased employment opportunities for women in fiscal 1983; by working with other government agencies, the private sector, community and educational organizations, the Bureau sought to remove barriers to employment for women and to address women's training and support systems needs.
Several demonstration projects were developed during the year to provide models which community agencies could use or adapt to meet their individual needs.
For example, in the rural Mississippi Delta, a project provided training and job placement assistance to 50 mature, low-income women.
As a result of this 9-month program, 20 women were placed in part-time summer jobs and 16 in regular jobs.
At least a dozen earned high school equivalency certificates as a result of the program, and a total of 38 returned to college for additional training in order to qualify for better jobs.
The Bureau was also active in promoting child care.
By informing employers of the benefits providing child care facilities or services, the Bureau created heightened awareness of the need for this service.
The Bureau also developed pilot projects which demonstrated the variety of options available to meet this crucial need.
Recognizing the need for increased women's participation in the work force, the Bureau issued a number of publications concerning women's occupations, earnings and education.
The Bureau has distributed its full supply of 33,000 copies of the updated publication A Working Woman's Guide to Her Job Rights.
The Bureau also initiated studies of issues important to women, including the problems of women veterans seeking work in the civilian job market, the impact of technological change on women's employment opportunities, the impact of job dislocation on women, and employment concerns of immigrant women.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) made major contributions through its influence on actions of the 1983 International Labor Organization (ILO) Conference in Geneva.
These contributions helped produce the most positive results of any ILO conference in the last 25 years.
By successful lobbying for a secret ballot, the United States defeated the Soviet Union's attempt to block adoption of a key committee report.
This report criticized the Soviet bloc for denying fundamental trade union rights to its workers and was the first open chastisement of Soviet propaganda in any United Nations-related organization.
Other significant achievements by ILAB included: the increased participation by the Department in U.S. trade policy decisions, the creation of a trade union rights condition for designation under the Administration's Caribbean Basin Initiative, publication of a new directory of foreign labor organizations, and continued support for Poland's Solidarity in the ILO.
In fiscal 1983 the Office of Inspector General (OIG) greatly expanded its capability to combat fraud, waste, and abuse in Federal programs.
The number of auditors in OIG was increased from 164 to 287 and the number of investigators was increased form 157 to 173.
Due to the increased personnel, OIG was able to audit the internal accounting and administrative control systems of the 50 States and seven jurisdictions to ensure effective handling of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) funds.
In addition, a specialpurpose review of selected prime sponsors under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) established proper distribution of assets and liabilities, and audits of State agency benefit payment control systems for unemployment insurance helped reduce fraud and abuse in these programs.
Organized crime influence in labor-management activities was a key target of the IG's Office of Organized Crime and Racketeering, and there were significant increases in indictments and convictions in this area as well as from investigations of fraud and mismanagement in Department-sponsored programs.
In addition, cooperative efforts with the Employment Standards Administration resolved problems in management of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act program.
The U. S. Department of Labor serves all American workers.
Its many activities touch the lives of virtually every man, woman and child in our country.
The Department's many responsibilities include protecting the health and safety, employment and pension rights of working people; requiring payment of a minimum wage and overtime rates after 40 hours a week; prohibiting discrimination in the workplace for any reason except the ability to do the job; providing job training, unemployment insurance and workers'compensation; promoting collective bargaining, and collecting, analyzing and publishing labor statistics.
The information contained in this annual report establishes that the Department of Labor has continued to build on the record of accomplishments achieved during the past 2 years of the Reagan Administration.
The Department of Labor has successfully met the challenge of providing more efficient, cost-effective programs to the American public and will continue to progress in all areas of its mission.
At the same time, the Department and the public benefitted greatly from the support of a dedicated, experienced and professional staff, which has demonstrated its vision and its administrative talents in developing and implementing vital worker protection initiatives and management controls.
The major focus of the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) in fiscal year 1983 was the implementation of a new training system under the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
JTPA was enacted into law on October 1, 1982 and scheduled to become effective October 1, 1983.
JTPA represents a landmark in employment and training legislation in that it makes fundamental changes in the approach to assisting the unemployed.
A focus on training as the primary purpose of the program and strict limitations on expenditures for activities not directly related to training.
A lead role for the private sector in the planning, operation, and administration of local training programs through Private Industry Councils.
Expansion of the State role in training and employment programs to include management and oversight functions formerly carried out by the Federal Government.
Establishment of a new training program for dislocated workers.
Basic changes in the operation of the U.S. Employment Service (ES) and the affiliated State Employment Service Agencies.
Because the new act represented a sharp departure from its predecessors, the implementation required extensive organizational and procedural changes in the structure and administration of employment and training programs.
Prior to the signing into law of JTPA, a Transition Task Force was established in ETA to oversee the implementation of the new system.
As a result of this early preparation, an implementation plan was published the same month that JTPA became law.
A month later, in November 1982, an advisory committee on the implementation was established, and all Governors designated staff to act as liaison in carrying out the implementation.
Section 181 of the new act imposed a very tight schedule for the development and issuance of regulations and other guidance under the new system.
Rules regarding the State Job Training Coordinating Councils (SJTCC's), Service Delivery Areas (SDA's) and Private Industry Councils (PIC's) were published in preliminary form in November and in final form in December 1982.
Final regulations for the operation of titles I, II, and III were published in March 1983.
One of the most significant aspects of the new structure established by JTPA was the emphasis on performance rather than process.
The act specified two major goals for adult participants: increased employment and earnings and reduced welfare dependency.
Specified for youth are additional goals of employment competencies and educational achievement.
JTPA established the development and promulgation of performance standards as a major part of the Federal responsibility.
It assigned the Secretary the responsibility for developing measurable performance standards although Governors may adjust the standards within parameters established by the Secretary.
Performance standards were required not only for the block grant program administered at the State and local level, but also for the dislocated worker program authorized by title III and for certain national programs.
The act specified certain factors to be considered in developing standards and set specific dates for the issuance of standards for the basic program.
Two sets of standards were required: interim standards for the initial 9-month period (October 1, 1983 to June 30, 1984) and longer term standards for the first full program year which begins on July 1, 1984.
The interim standards were to be published within 6 months of enactment; standards for the first program year were to be published by January 31, 1984.
Reflecting the legislation's strong emphasis on performance, a major part of ETA's efforts in fiscal 1983 focused on development and implementation of the performance standards.
An Office of Performance Management, established in ETA, undertook the extensive analysis and research necessary to develop fair and equitable standards and to develop and disseminate technical assistance on their use.
The required interim performance standards were published on April 12, 1983, within the deadline established by the Congress.
The performance standards included the following measures for adults: entered employment rate; cost for entered employment; average wage at placement; and welfare entered employment rate.
Measures for youth included: entered employment rate; positive termination rate; and cost for positive termination.
In addition to issuing the interim standards, ETA developed and issued an optional methodology for the use of the Governors in adjusting the national standards to local conditions.
While the Congress scheduled fiscal 1983 as the transition year with the provisions of CETA to remain in effect, concern with the problem of dislocated workers prompted the Congress to enact funds for title II of JTPA in early 1983.
As a result, title III became operational during fiscal 1983 with some $110 million provided to States to begin programs for dislocated workers.
In addition to implementing JTPA, ETA also continued to administer CETA and to make the necessary arrangements to assure proper closeout of the program.
Finally, ETA maintained a concerted effort to improve the management of the resources it administers and to reduce fraud and abuse by strengthening its financial and procurement oversight activities.
Audit and debt collection were substantially strengthened by additional staff and new procedures to assure close and timely oversight of grants and contracts.
Although fiscal 1983 was designated as the transition year to JTPA, major activity continued under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA).
During the year, comprehensive training programs were operated by 475 State and local prime sponsors that received funds for employment and training services under CETA.
After the first three quarters of the fiscal year, prime sponsors reported over 800,000 individuals served under the consolidated title II BC grants at a cost of an estimated $1.4 billion.
This estimate included 20 percent administrative costs.
Of a total of 443,200 participants terminated from the program, 224,100 were placed in jobs.
Of the total placements, 86.8 percent, or 194,500 people, were placed in jobs in the private sector.
In addition, 35,400 returned to school or entered further training.
The average cost for placing a participant in a job during this period was approximately $6,070 and the average hourly wage upon entering unsubsidized employment was $4.34.
Most participants were enrolled in one of three major types of training activities: classroom training, on-the-job training, and work experience.
Many individuals received assistance such as job development, counseling, or supportive services without being enrolled in one of the three training activities.
In the first three quarters of the year, more than half of all participants served were enrolled in classroom training.
Approximately 25 percent participated in work experience and 16 percent were enrolled in onthe-job training programs.
At the end of the third quarter of fiscal 1983, 98 percent of the participants were economically disadvantaged and 50 percent were receiving some type of public assistance at the time of enrollment.
Over 800,000 youth participated in the Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP) in fiscal 1983.
The summer program provided economically disadvantaged youth with employment opportunities and related training and education during the summer months.
In fiscal 1983, CETA prime sponsors were provided $824.6 million to conduct summer programs in their areas.
The Job Corps, which provided a wide range of training, education, and support services, primarily in residential centers, for disadvantaged youth aged 16 to 21, served approximately 57,000 new enrollees and provided 40,300 service years in fiscal 1983.
It operated 106 training centers at a cost of $618 million.
During the fiscal year, ETA continued its initiative to reduce sole source contracting and to refine Job Corps operations cost estimates.
While completing its program of shifting from sole source to competitive contracts for the operation of Job Corps centers, ETA also opened to competition much of the outreach screening and placement contracting for the first time.
In addition, ETA extensively revised its procurement procedures for the Job Corps program, including issuing new standard Request for Proposals for Job Corps center operations contracts and outreach screening and placement contracts.
The new model Request for Proposal (RFP) provides clear direction to potential contractors and allows any interested firm an opportunity to bid on the operation of Job Corps Centers.
In another major effort, ETA conducted a complete review of all Job Corps vocational offerings to determine the vocations most suitable for Corps member training in relation to current and future labor market needs.
Documentation of the training needs included invaluable advice by persons outside Job Corps who served in an advisory capacity.
The work done in fiscal 1983 provided a basis for future decisions on training offered at the individual centers and guidance for assessing the direction of overall Job Corps training.
In other initiatives, ETA completed work on new performance standards for Job Corps center operations and initiated an improved financial management system.
Revisions in financial reporting procedures were expected to reduce the burden on contractors and make the reports more useful for management purposes.
Under JTPA, the Job Corps remained a Federal responsibility and continued to operate as it did under CETA.
In fiscal 1983, the Department continued training and other employment-related services to disadvantaged groups in the labor market.
Special programs served older workers, Indians and other Native Americans, and migrant and seasonal farmworkers.
In fiscal 1983 the Senior Community Service Employment Program, which gives grants to national organizations and State governments to develop part-time jobs in community work for poor persons aged 55 and older, provided employment for over 62,500 older persons through an appropriation of $319.4 million.
The Native American Employment and Training Program supported a wide variety of training and employment services through grants to Indian tribes, other Native American communities, and various organizations.
These programs served about 32,700 persons in fiscal 1983 at a cost of $69 million.
Almost 9,800 persons received classroom training; 2,600 were placed in on-the-job training; 8,500 were in work experience positions; 4,900 held public service employment jobs; and 6,900 received support services.
The Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Program, whose services ranged from job training to emergency relief for migrants and other seasonally employed farmworkers, served an estimated 44,800 persons at a cost of $70 million in fiscal 1983.
Approximately 10,700 of these individuals received classroom training; 2,400 were placed into on-the-job training, and 2,500 were provided work experience.
Many also received supportive services such as nutritional assistance, health and medical care, and emergency assistance.
Fiscal 1983 represented a transition year for Special National Level Programs, reflecting the emphasis of JTPA on State and local responsibility for providing training and the more limited role for national programs.
Most national job training and outreach programs operated at reduced levels in fiscal 1983 and were encouraged to seek State and local support in subsequent years under JTPA.
Various national organizations conducted on-the-job training and outreach programs that served over 5,700 individuals and placed almost 4,000 in private sector jobs during the fiscal year.
The majority of these individuals were economically disadvantaged and many were dislocated workers.
A major focus of the National Level Programs in fiscal 1983 was on training and placement services for handicapped persons through support for organizations that serve the handicapped.
Among the organizations conducting such programs were The Association for Retarded Citizens, Goodwill Industries, Epilepsy Foundation, the Federation of the Blind, the National Association of Rehabilitation Facilities, the Electronic Industries Foundation, and Mainstream.
It is estimated that these organizations served over 5,000 handicapped persons and placed almost 3,000 in unsubsidized employment during the year.
Another major activity of the Special National Level Programs was the Partnership Program, an effort of national organizations representing the business community, the labor movement, and various community-based organizations to foster cooperation and participation in training and employment programs by local affiliates.
These organizations played an important role in the JTPA transition activities during 1983 by providing training, informational materials, and technical assistance on the new act to a wide range of organizations as well as to their individual constituencies.
A special demonstration program was begun in fiscal 1983 as a joint public/private venture in job training with the potential for nationwide application.
Under the auspices of the Greater Cincinnati Industrial Training Corporation, public agencies and corporations, led by General Electric, joined to develop and conduct a training and certification program in the industrial machining and fabrication field.
Among its major features, the program will develop state-of-the-art training materials which will eventually be available nationwide, and will develop and promote a standardized certification process for individuals who complete training to assist them in obtaining employment in the industrial machining and fabrication industry.
During fiscal 1983, ETA continued to provide current and potential sponsors of apprenticeship programs with technical assistance and advisory services.
These services were provided by direct contact with private sector employers, employer associations, and labor organizations at the local, State, and national levels.
New and revised apprenticeship standards describing work processes in various skilled occupations and descriptions of effective training methods for use by program sponsors were published.
Two new occupations, welding technician and television director, were recognized as apprenticeable occupations, bringing the total number to 734.
About 50,000 new apprentices entered training during the fiscal year.
Over 250,000 apprentices were in training at the end of the year, including about 17,000 females (7 percent) and 51,000 members of minority groups (20 percent).
ETA assisted the Department of Defense in establishing apprenticeship programs for uniformed personnel designed to make military careers more attractive, improve the proficiency of personnel, and provide personnel with career training that could be continued after they left military service.
Over 40,000 uniformed personnel were enrolled in apprenticeship programs run by the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps as of the end of the year, an increase of 11,000 over fiscal 1982.
The Army alone had almost 36,000 uniformed apprentices.
The Defense Department also sponsors apprenticeship programs for its civilian employees.
The 48,000 apprenticeship programs registered with either ETA or one of the 32 State apprenticeship agencies at the end of the year showed a decline of 3,000 from the previous year-end total.
During the year almost 2,400 new programs were developed and installed by Federal staff and about 2,000 programs were reviewed for compliance with Federal equal opportunity requirements.
In response to reduced State and Federal funding of apprenticeship activities, ETA redeployed apprenticeship staff and shifted priorities to assure adequate levels of service in States which had eliminated or greatly reduced their own apprenticeship programs because of fiscal constraints.
State and regional apprenticeship conferences continued to be sponsored as a means of bringing State, Federal, and private sector training professionals together to discuss common concerns.
Efforts initiated last year to improve the quality of apprenticeship training continued.
A task group was convened to review and revise the program quality rating system.
Just under 2,200 quality assessments were performed during the year.
Based upon the results of these and previous quality assessments, apprenticeship field staff assisted sponsors to implement such quality improvements as the use of performance-based training, revised work processes, and updated related theoretical instruction.
During the first three quarters of fiscal 1983, almost 12 million persons submitted job applications at the Job Service offices, and 4,343,000 job openings were listed by employers.
Of the jobs listed, 3,286,000 (or 76 percent) were filled.
The 1983 applications represented an increase of 1,022,000 over a comparable period in fiscal 1982.
In 1983, a major effort was initiated to establish an effective National Job Bank System (NJBS).
Starting with the basic interstate clearance'system in existence since 1979, staff aimed to develop a national consensus on criteria for jobs appropriate for interstate advertising, improve the speed and efficiency of information transmittal, and increase user awareness.
The newly established NJBS provided a computerized mechanism through which hard-to-fill job orders were distributed to all Job Service local offices nationwide; responsibility for referring and placing applicants was retained by the local Job Service.
Specific improvements included: the institution of computer tape-to-tape exchange between the State Employment Security Agencies (SESA's) and the Interstate Job Bank; establishment of criteria for selection and submittal of job orders for interstate listing; and a reduction in the turnaround time for distribution of weekly listings of the hard-to-fill orders.
To date, these changes achieved an increase from 650 job orders listed at any given time to 3,000.
Other planned improvements included replacement of tape-to-tape exchange of job order data with telecommunication and networking techniques between SESA computers.
Development of two new forms of the General Aptitude Test Battery.
Further development of a new technique for determining an applicant's aptitude for any occupation.
Construction of self-assessment techniques for applicants'use in assessing their skills.
Adaptation of aptitude tests for application to handicapped applicants.
Staff of Job Service offices continued to have special responsibilities for administering the Targeted Jobs Tax Čredit (TJTC) and Trade Adjustment Assistance program.
Job Service offices issued a total of 263,800 certifications under the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit program during the first three quarters of fiscal 1983, including 13,800 certifications for the new target group of disadvantaged summer youth.
The 1981 amendments to the Trade Act of 1974 increased emphasis on the provision of training, job search, and relocation assistance.
During the year, 96,187 workers covered by 422 petitions were certified as eligible to apply for trade adjustment assistance.
Of these, 8,700 entered federally financed training, 622 received job search allowances, and 2,509 relocated to other areas.
Another 3,908 individuals were placed directly into jobs.
During fiscal 1983, Job Service Employer Committees (JSEC) provided private sector leadership in assisting State Employment Security Agencies implement the new Wagner-Peyser amendments under JTPA.
Through these committees more than 20,000 employers gave in excess of 150,000 volunteer hours each month during fiscal 1983 to help the Job Service improve its delivery and service capability to applicants and employers.
During the first three quarters of fiscal 1983, the Work Incentive (WIN) program, which provides training and employment services to recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and is administered jointly by DOL and the Department of Health and Human Services, registered nearly 465,000 individuals in 36 States.
Most participants were from groups traditionally at a disadvantage in the labor market.
Seventy percent of the registrants were women; a little more than half were minorities, and only 48 percent had graduated from high school.
More than 88,000 registrants entered unsubsidized employment in this 9-month period.
Sixty-three percent of WIN job entrants were women who, like their counterparts in the mainstream labor force, tended to cluster in clerical and service work.
Men were more likely to find blue-collar work.
A little more than onefourth of the men took jobs as structural workers or in freight handling and transportation.
More than half of the job entrants earned enough at job entry to leave the AFDC rolls after they started work; the others continued to receive some assistance, but at a reduced level.
WIN job entrants earned an average starting wage of $4.52 per hour, but wages varied considerably among the different groups.
Men averaged $5.21 an hour at job entry; women averaged $4.12.
The highest rate was paid to unemployed parents whose average starting rate was $5.25 an hour.
Most of the unemployed parents were male heads of families.
About one-fourth of the male workers received an entry wage of $6.00 or more an hour, a wage paid to only 1 in 10 women.
In the first 9 months of fiscal 1983 local Job Service offices, which give priority to veterans in counseling, aptitude testing, job development, referral and placement activities, received 1,646,200 new and renewed applications from veterans and placed about 321,700 veterans in jobs.
Established by legislation as a permanent program and staffed by approximately 2,000 disabled veterans, the Disabled Veterans Outreach Program (DVOP) helps disabled and Vietnam-era veterans obtain employment and training assistance.
DVOP staff assigned to local Job Service offices contributed to the job placement of 17,963 disabled veterans through June of fiscal 1983.
In fiscal 1983 the Administration initiated and Congress approved two extensions of the Federal Supplemental Compensation (FSC) program that initially had been enacted in the closing days of fiscal 1982.
In addition to extending the period of eligibility, the number of weeks of payment was increased in the Surface Transportation Act of 1982 (January 1983) and again in the Social Security Amendments of 1983 (April 1983).
Ön October 24, 1983, President Reagan signed a further extension of FSC.
The Social Security Amendments also included significant steps aimed at strengthening the solvency of State unemployment funds.
During the first 10 months of fiscal 1983, 23 million initial claims were filed in SESA's.
One hundred seventy-six million weeks of unemployment were claimed and $18.7 billion was paid out in benefits to about 9 million recipients.
Improving internal security in SESA's continued as a major emphasis in the drive to curb employees'fraud and abuse.
Based on analyses of Federal and State reviews of internal security and control in unemployment insurance (UI) operations, recommendations for improvement in operations as well as procedural revisions were developed for SESA use.
Most SESA's strengthened their internal security staff and conducted risk analyses in accordance with procedures and training furnished by the Employment and Training Administration.
In an effort to curb fraud and abuse, a Federal-State Benefit Payment Oversight Committee was formed, with responsibility to review and recommend (as appropriate) a wide range of initiatives to improve the ability of the SESA's to detect, collect, prosecute, and deter UI fraud and overpayments.
To control improper payments, the random audit program was expanded and is operational in 35 SESA's.
This audit program was designed to produce valid rates of detectable overpayments or improper payments on a statewide basis and will serve as a management tool to identify problems and foster corrective action.
The audit will be expanded to the remaining 18 SESA's in fiscal 1984.
In spite of improvements in the financing structures of many State laws, continuing high levels of unemployment caused heavy drains on State UI funds as a whole.
As a result, at the end of fiscal 1983, 24 States had outstanding loans totaling $12.9 billion, compared to 20 States with aggregate loans of $8.6 billion at the end of fiscal 1982.
During the fiscal year, the States of Alabama, Colorado, Louisiana, Montana, Texas, Utah, and Virginia borrowed from the Federal Unemployment Account for the first time.
Alabama, Utah, and Virginia repaid these loans before the end of the fiscal year.
Under the Redwood Employee Protection Program, $85.3 million was paid to affected workers in weekly layoff benefits and severance payments since the beginning of the program.
Preliminary data indicate that in fiscal 1983 affected workers were paid benefits for 39,263 weeks for a total of $9.7 million.
Severance payments totalling $6.5 million were made to 284 workers.
Only three relocation and job search claims were paid for a total of $5,983.
Under the Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA) program during fiscal 1983, there were 19 major disasters declared in 12 States.
Some 8,046 individuals received DUA during the first 10 months of the period.
DUA benefits totalled $3.1 million for this period, up from $733,471 paid in all of fiscal 1982.
ETA investigated worker petitions to determine the eligibility of trade-impacted workers to receive additional weeks of unemployment benefits, training, counseling, job search and relocation payments.
Trade adjustment assistance was authorized by the Trade Act of 1974 as amended by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 and the Miscellaneous Revenue Act of 1982.
Fiscal 1983's efforts were directed at reducing the backlog of cases in order to approximate the 60 days required for a decision under the statute.
At the end of fiscal 1983 the backlog stood at 460 cases—a reduction of 27 percent as compared to the previous year.
The number of new petitions during the year totaled 1,215, compared to 809 in fiscal 1982.
The number of workers filing for benefits in fiscal 1983 was over 212,000, nearly twice the number filing for the previous year.
Over 100,000 were certified for benefits, the majority in the steel, automobile, and apparel industries.
Effective October 1, 1981, the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program was amended to require workers to exhaust their unemployment insurance benefits before receiving trade readjustment allowances (TRA) and reduced the TRA benefits to the same level as the weekly benefit amount payable under the State unemployment insurance programs.
Preliminary TAA data for fiscal 1983 shows that 24,547 workers affected by imports received TRA first payment.
A total of $30.2 million was paid in TRA benefits during this period.
Much of ETA's efforts in planning and policy analysis in fiscal 1983 were focused on the enactment and subsequent implementation of JTPA.
The signing of the new legislation early in the fiscal year was the culmination of many months of extensive staff work, analyzing issues that arose in developing the new program and in discussions with the Congress.
With the passage of JTPA, ETA planning efforts shifted to developing guidance for the implementation of the new system.
Staff prepared conceptual papers that helped to define and clarify the limits and roles of the several levels of government involved in the new block grant approach to training and employment.
These planning papers provided guidance in the design of the new system and in the development of regulations to implement the new law.
In addition, ETA staff provided support for a number of other significant legislative activities during the year.
These included the several extensions of the Federal Supplemental Compensation program that were enacted, work on proposals for reforming the immigration system, and analyses for special youth minimum wage proposals.
Implementation of a system of High Priority Objectives and Subobjectives to guide the overall ETA planning system.
Completion and submission to Congress of the 1982 Employment and Training Report of the President, including a report on the findings of ETA's program of research, demonstration, and evaluation projects.
Completion of a number of analyses on such issues as methods to alleviate adverse trade impacts, and the role of employment and training programs in addressing urban problems.
In accordance with the Regulatory Reform and Paperwork Reduction Act, ETA continued a program of reducing, and simplifying the regulations covering the programs under its administration.
As the result of the enactment of JTPA, regulations governing employment and training programs were drastically reduced and simplified.
ETA continued to provide staff support for DOL's responsibilities under the Emergency Preparedness program.
A significant accomplishment in this area was the preparation of the Human Resources Section of the National Plan for Emergency Preparedness.
ETA prepared a wide range of position papers, analyses, and briefing documents to support DOL's participation in the employment and training activities of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the International Labor Organization, and other international organizations.
Research efforts in fiscal 1983 focused much more sharply on employment and training program operations in anticipation of changes brought about with passage of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
A major process evaluation of the transition and first full JTPA program year was initiated.
Reflecting another major theme of JTPA, a series of projects was begun to explore establishment of performance standards—including reduction of welfare dependency—for job training programs to be administered by the States.
In addition, funding was provided for development of performance standard guidelines for Employment Services (ES) activities.
JTPA's title III program for dislocated workers was foreshadowed by a series of dislocated worker demonstration projects that were expected to help shape programs begun by the States.
One, the Downriver Community Conference demonstrations provided job search and retraining services to some 2,000 dislocated workers in Michigan.
Preliminary results indicate that participating workers experience less unemployment and locate jobs with higher pay than similar dislocated workers who do not receive the services.
Funding also was provided for a six-site dislocated worker demonstration program and for a process and impact evaluation of this program.
Two major projects were implemented to improve the cost effectiveness of ÈS and Unemployment Insurance Services (UI) operations.
The first, a combined ES/UI effort had the objective of finding ways to reduce the drain on State UI trust funds by improving ES placements and administration of the work test for UI claimants.
Preliminary results indicate that substantial savings can be made by improving the coordination of services between the two programs.
The second project is designing and implementing improvements to the Interstate Clearance System.
This has resulted in a nationwide computer-assisted system for listing hard-to-fill jobs.
Anticipating Congressional interest, a study was expanded to generate data on characteristics of recipients of Federal Supplemental Compensation benefits.
In response to a Congressional request, ETA initiated a study of unemployment, poverty, and job training needs of American Samoans who have moved to Hawaii and the U.S. mainland.
Labor force and economic issues that were studied during the year included continuation of the National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS) of groups of workers at critical transition stages of working life—labor force entry, reentry, and preretirement and retirement.
A number of reports were produced on topics such as trends in employment of young women, welfare dependency among young women, formal training in the adult years, determinants and wage effects of occupational segregation, and determinants of retirement of older men.
A project was initiated on operational and managerial strategies for maintaining the Dictionary of Occupational Titles; and a major study was begun to synthesize the results of lessons learned from the operation of youth employment demonstration projects over a period of years beginning with the 1978 amendments to the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act.
Major evaluation findings during the year principally concerned projects addressing postprogram effects of CET.A activities.
Periodic reports from the Continuous Longitudinal Manpower Survey (CLMS) provided detailed data on enrollees in CETA programs, the in-program training and/or employment they receive, and both their pre- and postprogram employment and earnings.
Three reports on the initial 2 years of postprogram experience of participants who entered CETA programs in fiscal 1976 found that these persons steadily improved their employment and earnings in the first 2 years after leaving the programs.
The pattern of continuing improvement in the second postprogram year held true for participants in each type of program, but participants in the training programs tended to have larger percentage gains than those in the subsidized employment programs.
Participants who stayed in the programs longer had higher postprogram earnings and larger pre-post gains.
Another CLMS report indicated similar 2-year, postprogram results for persons who entered CETA between July 1976 and September 1977.
An evaluation of the economic impact of the Job Corps was completed after 4 years of postprogram followup on individuals enrolled in the program in 1977.
The experiences of the Job Corps participants were compared to a similar group of disadvantaged youth not in the program.
The basic finding of a national evaluation of the Employment Service's (ES) impact on jobseekers was that applicants who received ES job referral assistance found jobs more quickly and earned more in 6 months after applying to the ES than did comparable applicants who did not get a referral.
However, these overall positive results reflected substantial gains for women with little or no impact for men.
A report on the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Project (YIEPP) examined the feasibility of enrolling large numbers of economically disadvantaged youth in a guaranteed jobs program.
YIEPP involved over 76,000 youth and was conducted at 17 sites from early 1978 to mid-1980.
During fiscal 1983, work began on the design, data collection, and data base management of the Job Training Longitudinal Survey, the primary instrument to be used for evaluating the impact of the new Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
Focus of this major evaluation will be on JTPA titles IIA and III, and the impact these programs have on participants, particularly in terms of increases in their employment and earnings and reductions in costs of income support for them.
Other evaluation efforts funded during the fiscal year concerned the Job Corps, Indian, Migrant, and Unemployment Insurance worksharing programs.
In fiscal 1983, ETA initiated the implementation of the electronic transfer of funds through the'Letter of Credit-Treasury Financial Communications System (LOC-TFCS).
This required the development of an implementation plan and its approval by the Department of Treasury; the training of Federal, State, and local staff in its use; and the development of training materials.
The system was successfully implemented and tested by States in the Dallas region during the fourth quarter of fiscal 1983.
All necessary actions were taken to put the State Job Training Partnership Act agencies on LOC-TFCS by the beginning of fiscal 1984.
In addition, ETA developed a cash flow management system to monitor more closely the letter of credit drawdown process in ETA regional offices.
An automated cash drawdown analysis program was written and tested during the fourth quarter of fiscal 1982.
In fiscal 1983, this system was implemented, refined with the development of additional management information reports, and expanded to Special National Office programs.
As of Aug. 8, 1983, some $32 million in excess cash had been identified as savings in fiscal 1983.
With the electronic fund transfer system in place, the problem of excess cash drawdowns should be significantly reduced.
The reduction in excess drawdowns between fiscal 1982 and fiscal 1983 was in the neighborhood of $55 million dollars.
ETA in fiscal 1982 began the development of an automated plan-procurement process tracking system.
This system was designed to control the procurement process from approval of the project by the Assistant Secretary and its inclusion in the advanced annual procurement plan, through the signing of the contract/grant.
This process was completed and all present and future ETA procurements approved for funding will be identified in the plan procurement tracking system and their status will be continually available for monitoring.
The system has an online, ready retrievable capability.
In fiscal 1983, ETA had an information collection budget plan of 6,402,800 burden hours, which constituted a 317,800 burden hour reduction from the fiscal 1982 level.
Through the development of a burden hour reduction tracking system and a reports tracking system, ETA achieved an actual reduction of 785,700 burden hours.
This reduction is more than double the goal for the year and a 12 percent reduction from the previous fiscal year total.
A basic objective of ETA is the resolution of all outstanding audits and the elimination of backlogged contract/grant closeout activity.
During fiscal 1983, ETA made notable progress toward meeting this basic objective by resolving 631 audits of contracts and grants.
As a result of the audit resolution process, total debts to ETA of $67.3 million were established, a significant increase over the total debt established in fiscal 1982.
Of the 631 audits resolved, 224 were appealed to a Department of Labor administrative law judge.)
Also during fiscal 1983, 917 contracts/grants were closed out.
An additional 519 expired contracts/grants were pending closeout at the end of fiscal 1983.
These could not be closed for a variety of administrative reasons, including debt collection, appeals, unresolved audit issues, and resolution cost rates.
In addition, ETA emphasized a preliminary closeout cash collection effort in which grants/contracts that had ended, but had remaining unspent funds, were preliminarily closed by collecting funds remaining and not needed for closeout.
In fiscal 1983 some $15 million were collected through this effort.
During fiscal 1983, a specific unit devoted to debt collections was created to administer a program to satisfy monetary claims against grantees and contractors.
Procedures were developed to refer appropriate debt cases to the Department of Justice and the General Accounting Office (GAO) for enforced collection.
Total ETA debt collections were in excess of $18 million.
The Special Review Unit continued to administer a program to determine statutory and regulatory compliance.
Allegations of impropriety received through the GAO and Inspector General Hotline Systems, Incident Report System (IR), and through other sources were investigated, coordinated, and resolved or referred to the appropriate Government agencies for judicial review.
Over 450 IR, GAO, and IG inquiries were handled during the year.
Also a preaward review program was established to provide information on the financial and administrative practices of prospective grantees and contractors to insure the integrity of ETA programs.
An Internal Control Unit was established to direct the development, implementation, and administration of a program to satisfy the requirements of the Federal Manager's Financial Integrity Act of 1982 and OMB Circular A-123.
The act prescribes policies and standards to be followed by all 'executive departments in establishing and maintaining effective systems of internal controls to determine if funds, property, and other assets are properly safeguarded to eliminate waste, loss, unauthorized use, or misappropriation of assets.
All ETA programs and functions were assessed to determine their vulnerability to occurrence of waste, loss, unauthorized use, or misappropriation.
More comprehensive reviews of 16 of those programs and functions were performed.
The leadership of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) was secured for another four years with President Reagan's reappointment of Janet L. Norwood as its Commissioner for her second four-year term.
Following a unanimous vote of the Senate confirming the President's nomination, she was sworn in by Secretary Donovan on June 13, 1983.
As the economy improved in the early months of fiscal year 1983, the intense public scrutiny of the Bureau's principal macroindicators, which generally accompanies adverse economic conditions, subsided; inflation began to slow early in the year followed by some moderate improvement in the unemployment rate.
The Armed Forces were added to the labor force data in February 1983.
This change in concept, recommended by the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics and supported by the Secretary of Labor, resulted in an unemployment rate that was only about 0.1 percent less than the civilian rate at the time of the initial publication.
Both rates are now published in the Employment Situation release.
The housing component of the Čonsumer Price Index was changed to a rental equivalence concept with the data for January 1983, in line with a previously announced schedule.
This change reflected the continuing interest rate crisis that precipitated sharp changes in financial arrangements for house sales, unresolved problems with the FHA data on house prices, and the expanding use of the index for escalation purposes.
For these reasons, the Commissioner decided not to wait for the next revision of the index to make this change.
The Bureau continued efforts to modernize the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings and continued work on the implementation of a redesigned Current Population Survey.
In addition to the technical authority BLS has long held for labor information statistical programs, funding and managerial control were transferred to the Bureau from the Employment and Training Administration.
The revisions of the Producer Price Index continued, and industry coverage expanded from 149 to 230 industries.
In addition, the Bureau published initial data from the 1980-81 Consumer Expenditure Survey.
The Bureau substantially strengthened its Employment Cost Index through a sample replacement effort in the service, construction, finance, and insurance industries.
In addition, planning began on converting the ECI to the new Standard Occupational Classification system.
For use in the Federal pay comparability process, BLS issued the annual survey of professional, administrative, technical, and clerical pay.
The Bureau also released its fourth annual report on paid leave and employee benefit plans in medium and large firms, a unique source of comprehensive data on detailed characteristics of employee benefits in private industry.
BLS made substantial progress in strengthening and expanding its program of measurement and analysis of productivity and technology.
The Bureau provided organizational support and background papers for the White House Conference on Productivity which was held in September 1983.
The publication for the first time of multifactor productivity measures for major sectors of the economy, and the release of additional industry measures, broadened the coverage of the Bureau's measurement program.
BLS prepared reports on trends in technology and their implications in several major U.S. industries.
The Bureau conducted special analyses on high technology employment growth and on supply/demand conditions for engineers.
Projections of the labor force and industry and occupational employment to 1995 were prepared.
These projections included information on the job outlook that will appear in the 1984-85 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
The Bureau published estimates of occupational injuries and illnesses and issued three work injury reports.
Under the Supplementary Data System, the frequency of the coding of State workers' compensation data was changed from an annual to a biennial basis.
The Monthly Labor Review, one of the Bureau's major periodicals, won first prize in a national publications competition.
With release of data for January 1983, the Bureau began publication of several new data series, including a new total unemployment rate that added members of the resident Armed Forces to the labor force and employment counts.
Unemployment Statistics was accepted by both Secretary Marshall and Secretary Donovan.
BLS work continued on the implemenation of a redesigned Current Population Survey (CPS) in coordination with the Bureau of the Census and a consortium of Federal agencies.
Mid-1985 is the target date for introduction of a new sample incorporating information from the 1980 Census of Population.
The Bureau continued to meet the labor force data needs— heightened by the recessionary period—of the press, business, academia, Congress, and government agencies.
Analyses issued included the regular monthly summaries of employment and unemployment, as well as the semiannual and annual reporting, plus quarterly reports on weekly earnings, women in the labor force, and minorities.
Special research projects resulted in articles on the employment status of families, regional unemployment, older workers and, among others, workers on layoff and shortened workweeks.
Also, the Bureau issued several new publications, including Workers Without Jobs: A Chartbook; Women at Work: A Chartbook; and Workers, Jobs, and Statistics.
The Bureau's second annual report examining the impact of employment problems on the economic well-being of families was published.
The Bureau completed the negotiation of cooperative agreements for labor market information statistical programs with 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
In addition to the technical authority BLS has long held for these programs—Current Employment Statistics, Local Area Unemployment Statistics, and Occupational Employment Statistics—funding and managerial control were transferred in 1983 to the Bureau from the Employment and Training Administration (ETA).
The Bureau continued efforts to modernize the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings.
Projects were introduced to determine the appropriate estimating cell structure and the feasibility of collecting new types of data, such as hours and earnings of all employees.
These studies should provide important information for long-term evaluation of alternative sample design and data collection techniques.
Also, tests began for the application of new computer technology toward the goals of improving data quality and timeliness and, for the future, providing a means for reducing State costs in this and other BLS Federal/State cooperative programs.
The Bureau developed industry-occupational employment estimates for nonmanufacturing industries, based on data collected through the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) survey.
A redesigned occupational structure for the OES program, based on the Federal Standard Occupational Classification system, was used in developing survey questionnaires for the 1983 OES survey of manufacturing industries and hospitals.
The employment and wage program (ES-202) objectives continued to be focused on improving the quality and efficiency of the operations of cooperating State agencies.
Some 45 States are now reporting 4-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) data at the county level.
Specifications for the new county level macro edit were completed.
Early results of tests of the revised industry verification process for SIC refiling point to greatly reduced State workload and cost, decreased respondent burden, and improved response.
Work began on a photocomposition process for the publication of employment and wage data.
The Department of Labor introduced use of employment and wage data in computation of wage rates to be paid to alien farm workers.
To determine hospital cost reimbursements under the Medicare program, the Health Care Finance Administration is using the new hospital industry wage indexes, also produced in the program, which were developed for all Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA's).
The passage of antirecessionary job creation legislation created an unanticipated demand for local area employment and unemployment data from a variety of Federal agencies, many of which had not before used local area unemployment statistics for allocation purposes.
This demand required close coordination between the agencies and BLS to develop a number of special tabulation packages.
In addition, for the administration of the new Job Training Partnership Act, data for areas of substantial unemployment were provided to ETA on schedule.
The development and testing of new methods for preparing labor force and unemployment estimates for States and metropolitan areas neared completion.
A system for improving the estimation of nonagricultural wage and salary employment in small areas was developed and is being tested in a number of States.
Incorporation of 1980 census data into the Local Area Unemployment Statistics estimates continued.
States began using 1980 census data in the development of area youth population ratios, in the disaggregation of data on unemployment insurance claimants in multicounty labor markets, and in the censusshare disaggregation of cities.
As a result of the use of computer software introduced last year, the Bureau's publication of the 1982 edition of Geographic Profile of Employment and Unemployment was issued substántially earlier than in prior years.
The program to develop an improved measure of rental equivalence costs of owner-occupied housing, begun in fiscal year 1982, was completed.
The new rental equivalence measure replaced the homeownership component of the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) in January 1983.
In addition, the program to update the CPI outlet sample in one-fifth of the CPI pricing areas went forward as scheduled in 1983 and will continue next year.
During 1983, plans were refined for the next revision of the Consumer Price Index.
Attention was focused on how work on some major technical issues would affect the revision's schedule.
The revision is scheduled to begin in 1984 and be completed in 1988.
Publication of the revised index will begin with data for January 1987.
The revision of the Producer Price Index continued; publication of revised indexes, in which scientific sampling and improved data collection techniques were used, expanded from 149 industries in 1982 to 230 in fiscal 1983.
In 1984, coverage will be further expanded to 315 industries.
In the International Price Program in fiscal 1983, publication of indexes for imports was expanded from 96 percent of the value of products imported into the United States to 100 percent.
Price indexes for exports were expanded from 71 percent of the value of products exported to 83 percent.
Export coverage will be expanded to 100 percent in 1984.
In 1983, the first data were published from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES), consisting of expenditure estimates for frequently purchased items, such as food, for the years 1980 and 1981.
Work continued on the development of the computer system for processing CES data.
Approximately 1.5 million copies of printed materials were distributed in response to more than 490,000 recorded requests for data and other information.
These figures exclude an extremely heavy correspondence and analysis workload in response to written and telephone requests from the Congress, policymaking agencies in the executive branch, private businesses, labor, and the general public.
The quality of the Bureau's Employment Cost Index data was enhanced through a sample replacement effort that substantially strengthened the ECI in the service, construction, finance, and insurance industries.
Planning was begun to introduce current employment weights and to convert the ECI to the new Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) system.
Because the processing cycle has been shortened, the ECI news release is being issued 2 weeks earlier than in 1982.
The release is now issued during the fifth week after the end of the reference month instead of the seventh.
The Bureau delivered the annual survey of professional, administrative, technical, and clerical pay (PATC) on schedule for use in the Federal pay comparability process.
During the year, research continued in developing survey efficiencies, such as occupational subsampling, that permit adherence to the tight production schedule.
These efficiencies take on added importance because of the new and revised jobs in the computer area that will be included in the 1984 survey.
In the area of improving data quality, the staff successfully implemented a new Job Match Validation procedure that stemmed from recommendations in the 1982 GAO audit report on the PATC survey.
The Bureau released its fourth annual report on paid leave and employee benefit plans in medium and large firms.
The survey provides a unique source of comprehensive data on detailed characteristics of employee benefit plans—leave, pensions, and a variety of insurance—in private industry.
Since the first report, published results have been expanded from 21 to 50 statistical tables that distribute plan participants according to the detailed provisions.
The current bulletin includes much data not previously available.
The PATC survey again was the vehicle for collecting the fiscal year's benefit data.
This program produced two articles for the Monthly Labor Review based on the health insurance data—one in June 1982 describing the coverage and employee premiums in Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO's); the other in July 1982 analyzing developments in major medical coverage between 1974 and 1981.
Because of resource shortages, the Bureau was unable to conduct a feasibility test for integrating the benefits program with the Employment Cost Index—the first phase of a comprehensive linkage project to make the wage and benefit plans program more cohesive and cost effective.
The Bureau conducted area wage surveys in 70 metropolitan areas under its regular program of occupational wage surveys.
21 of the areas studied, information was collected for the first time on the incidence of formal provisions for supplementary unemployment benefits; severance pay; cost-of-living adjustments; and paid leave for personal reasons, jury duty, funerals, and military duty.
New job descriptions for word processors and material handling laborers were developed and tested for introduction into the 1984 survey program.
An analytical article on occupational wage relationships within establishments was published in the November 1982 Monthly Labor Review.
Under contract to the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), the Bureau conducted 80 area wage surveys and 62 special industry wage surveys for use in administering the Service Contract Act.
In six of the areas, data were obtained for the first time on wages in government; this brought the number of such areas to eight.
In another area, Colorado Springs, the collection of information on employer costs for employee benefits was successfully tested and the results published in June 1983.
Planning was begun for a test survey of construction wages and employee benefits, to be conducted for ESA during 1984 and 1985, which will test the feasibility of using statistical sampling techniques for making wage determinations under the Davis-Bacon Act.
As the result of fiscal year 1982 budget cuts reducing the industry wage survey (IWS) program by approximately 40 percent, the program was revised this year; 15 studies were dropped and 1 was added.
The total number of studies in the program is now 40 (25 manufacturing and 15 nonmanufacturing) representing approximately 65 industries.
Eight surveys were conducted this year—down from 12 to 15 conducted annually prior to the cut.
A testing of the occupational wage computer program for photocomposition of IWS locality releases was a success—both in timeliness and print quality.
Photocomposition will be used for all IWS locality releases.
Photocomposition of IWS bulletins continues to trim an average of 1 month from the time between the survey reference date and publication.
Two research projects that could improve the efficiency of data collection were begun this year and will continue into 1984.
The first is measuring variances of the industry wage survey estimates which, if desired precision is met, could reduce the needed sample size.
The second effort is aimed toward coordination of data collection between industry and area wage surveys.
The Bureau compiled universes and selected samples for approximately 170 occupational wage surveys for the Federal Wage System (FWS) in 1983.
Development began on a sample selection procedure for this project that will maintain a desired degree of continuity from one year's survey to the next.
The procedure must be operational by June 1984 when the second round of sample selection begins.
Data on the size of major collective bargaining contract settlements in private industry—a principal economic indicator—were published each quarter.
During the year, tabulations were added to the series to aid in the analysis of two unusual developments that occurred in collective bargaining—unscheduled contract reopenings and negotiated reductions in wages and benefits.
Data on the size of settlements in State and local government were issued on the regular semiannual schedule.
Publication of the 1983 Bargaining Calendar provided data on major contracts in private industry scheduled to expire or subject to reopening during the year.
An article that examined 1983 bargaining and highlighted key bargaining situations was published in the January 1983 Monthly Labor Review.
The article also analyzed negotiated wage increases and cost-of-living reviews scheduled for 1983.
Other major articles published were a review of important events in labor-management relations in 1982, and an examination of wage and compensation changes in private industry during 1982.
Current Wage Developments was issued each month.
It highlighted key wage and benefit negotiations and industrial relations developments and provided the details of wage and benefit changes in major collective bargaining situations and selected nonunion situations.
It listed as well major work stoppages in effect and major collective bargaining agreements expiring each month.
Extensive data on changes in employee compensation were also provided monthly.
BLS made substantial progress in strengthening and expanding its program of research and analysis of productivity and technology.
Productivity measures are widely regarded as a major indicator of U.S. economic progress, and the Bureau provided organizational support and background papers for the White House Conference on Productivity held in September 1983.
Multifactor productivity measures were announced for the first time, and a comprehensive bulletin was published which reviewed the results and explained the methodology and data sources.
These measures advance a major BLS effort to expand official productivity measures to take account of the role of capital inputs in changes in U.S. labor productivity.
They are also another step in the Bureau's continuing effort to study factors that influence productivity performance.
These include changes in the composition of the labor force, trends in the ratio of hours worked to hours paid, and capacity utilization adjustments for capital inputs used in the measures.
Preliminary estimates also were completed in fiscal 1983 on the stock of research and development capital to evaluate its contribution to productivity growth.
In addition, considerable progress was made in the preparation of multifactor productivity measures for detailed manufacturing industries.
The number of industries for which BLS publishes productivity data also was expanded.
The Bureau introduced new productivity measures for plastics, valve and pipe fittings, fabricated pipe and fittings, and electric metering instruments.
A total of 120 separate productivity measures are now issued for industries in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
The Bureau also made progress in measuring productivity in the Government sector.
The productivity measures for the Federal Government are being updated to cover fiscal year 1982.
These measures currently cover fiscal years 1967 to 1981 for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies, representing 64 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
In addition, a bulletin on measuring productivity in State and local government activities was submitted for publication.
In the international area, the Bureau updated trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 11 countries, and introduced new trade-weighted relative indexes.
In addition, the staff completed estimates of the comparative levels of compensation of production workers in 34 countries and 36 manufacturing industries.
The Bureau also updated international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in nine industrial countries.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
In response to widespread public interest, the Bureau continued to assess the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years were prepared for five additional major American industries—printing and publishing, water transportation, copper ore mining, fabricated structural metal, and intercity trucking.
A report on construction labor and material requirements in retail stores and shopping centers is nearing completion.
This will be the final study of this type because the program has been eliminated as a result of budget reductions.
During fiscal 1983, a new set of labor force, economic, and industry and occupational employment projections to 1995 was completed.
In addition, the 1984-85 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook was prepared.
National industry-occupation matrices for 1982 and 1995 based on data from the Occupational Employment Statistics surveys were also prepared.
Special analyses were conducted on supply-demand conditions for engineers, training for professional computer occupations, and on occupational patterns of young people who enter the labor force.
The results of these analyses were published in the Occupational Outlook Quarterly.
In addition, in fiscal 1983, the Bureau conducted a study that analyzed current and projected employment patterns in hightechnology industries.
The Bureau also studied the employment requirements generated by changes in defense and highway expenditures.
Current summaries of the principal economic indicators were also prepared and BLS provided a monthly summary and analysis of short-term economic forecasts.
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 requires statistical programs to meet Federal and State needs and provides for Federal funding to encourage State participation in these programs.
BLS activities for recordkeeping, the annual survey, the Supplementary Data System, and the Work Injury Report surveys are all carried out with State participation.
In fiscal 1983, the Bureau published the 1981 national estimates of occupational injuries, illnesses, and fatalities, and conducted its twelfth annual survey of employers nationwide.
Under the Supplementary Data System (SDS), 31 States received funding for the continuation of statistical programs based on workers'compensation records.
Under the Work Injury Report (WIR) survey program, three reports on completed surveys were published and three additional reports were in progress.
In November 1982, BLS released national estimates of occupational injuries and illnesses for calendar year 1981.
More detailed statistics by industry were published in a bulletin in January 1983.
Industry guides for construction, manufacturing, transportation and public utilities, and trade were also published, based on 1981 data.
The guides are updated each year.
Occupational fatality estimates and causal characteristics appeared in an article in the May 1983 issue of the Monthly Labor Review.
Individual State estimates for 1981 were produced by 38 States.
In fiscal 1983, 33 States, two without funding, participated in the occupational injury and illness SDS system based on workers' compensation first reports of injury.
However, by direction of the Office of Management and Budget, BLS did not systematically collect or process the 1982 State workers' compensation data.
From 1976 to 1982, the SDS data series had been maintained annually.
The data are used by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration to focus on special problem areas, such as the injury and illness experience of young and inexperienced workers.
Standard SDS tabulations, showing distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by work characteristics and work situations, as well as microdata for each participating State, are also available for general research purposes.
The Work Injury Report (WIR) survey program obtains detailed accident information directly from injured employees.
Results from three WIR studies were published in fiscal 1983; hand injuries, upper extremity amputations, and injuries in oil and gas drilling and services.
Work continued on the WIR reports for falls from elevations, falls on stairs, and injuries in logging.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health use results of WIR studies to evaluate and develop safety standards, compliance strategy, and training programs.
Managerial initiatives during fiscal 1983 continued to center on improving the accountability of the individual managers for the effectiveness of the program or service within their purview.
Reorganization: To strengthen managerial leadership and policy direction, the Bureau established the new position of Deputy Commissioner for Administration and Internal Operations and restructured—to bring under the new deputy—the Offices of Administration, Survey Operations, and Technology and Operations Review.
The Bureau also strengthened the Office of Research and Evaluation to assure adequate support of quality improvements and conceptual and statistical advances among the Bureau's indicators.
Labor-Market Information Programs: This year the Department of Labor centralized within BLS all managerial responsibility for the national labor market statistical programs: The current employment statistics program (BLS 790), the occupational employment survey, and the local area employment statistics program.
In anticipation of the transfer of resources from the Employment and Training Administration to cover the State operations of these programs on October 1, 1983, the Bureau developed new administrative and management procedures as well as the specifications for the cooperative agreements with the States to cover these operations.
This assumption of complete managerial responsibility for these programs is expected to remove many inefficiencies stemming from divided control between BLS and ETA.
Reduction of Reporting Burden: The Bureau continued to attend to the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 to reduce the reporting burden on survey respondents.
Even though during the year the burden increased slightly as a result of new survey work authorized by Congress, reductions were made that reflected improved sample efficiency.
Confidentiality of Bureau Data: The Bureau continued its efforts to secure legislation that would provide legal assurance of confidentiality to survey respondents.
Since the Office of Management and Budget is developing similar legislation that would protect all Federal programs, the Bureau cooperated in these broader efforts while at the same time seeking separate legislation to protect its own data until such time as the OMB proposal becomes operative.
Security of Bureau Data: The petition, made to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission during the year by the Coffee, Sugar, and Cocoa Exchange, and the Mid-Atlantic Commodity Exchange, to sell futures contracts on the Consumer Price Index and some components of the Producer Price Index each month centered attention on the Bureau's capacity to provide absolute security for its data.
Premature release—if accomplished—might provide a monetary advantage to speculators.
Even though the Bureau has an unblemished record in terms of protecting its data, plans were developed to tighten control of building and office entry, particularly in those areas in which sensitive data are housed.
Computer and Communications Services: In accordance with a proposal approved by Congress last year, the Bureau developed plans to purchase new equipment to provide many technological improvements.
These included more rapid and accurate data collection, machine editing of survey data, expanded statistical and econometric analysis, and more rapid communication among all Bureau offices, both national and regional.
In 1983, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) extended and refined its efforts to achieve program balance in the areas of regulation, service, assistance, and training.
It sought to foster a spirit of cooperation between the government and the industrial community (employer and employee) in working toward the mutual goal of improved workplace safety and health.
Efforts continued to promulgate reasonable and effective regulatory standards for workplace safety and health.
Standardssetting procedures were refined to firmly establish need, efficacy, feasibility, and methods of compliance.
OSHA perceived standards enforcement as a cooperative rather than adversarial exercise; establishing a safe and healthful workplace was preferred to responding to problems with punitive measures.
The achievement of OSHA's goal was further realized through service and assistance offered to employers and employees.
Field offices became centers to make the resources and expertise of OSHA and any related governmental organization available to the affected publics.
To assist the employer, a program was established to help evaluate the potential for hazardous or unhealthful conditions in a workplace.
The thrust was toward teamwork as best serving mutual goals.
In addition, a program of training was offered to employers and employees to further stimulate interest in establishing a safe and healthful workplace without hazards, that is, to take preventive measures rather than wait for government inspection.
Finally, these programs were implemented through a concerted effort to improve internal management and information handling.
A combination of management training and automated information processing was undertaken.
A key objective for OSHA in 1983 was to further refine the IMS, the Integrated Management System, designed in 1982 to help OSHA become a more efficient organization, achieving its goal within authorized personnel and budget ceilings.
This improved management system also enabled OSHA to emphasize the agency's programs equally, increase awareness of OSHA activities, encourage public participation in standard-setting, and stimulate private sector efforts to improve workplace conditions.
In order to deliver the full range of OSHA's safety and health services and information more effectively, OSHA assigned special importance to its area offices as focal points for the agency's delivery of services to the public.
OSHA's area offices, now known as Full Service Area Offices, operated in their respective areas as resource centers for safety and health information and delivery services for employees and employers, the general public, safety and health professionals, and State agencies.
Another mangement innovation, the IMIS, Integrated Management Information System, begun in 1982 and more fully implemented in 1983, assured a more efficient operation of the area offices; more information about State operations; improved debt collection procedures; and more accurate and timely data concerning OSHA's enforcement activities.
These systems (IMS and IMIS) allowed the agency to interpret quickly and accurately rates of worêplace injuries and illnesses; develop and improve program initiatives; and respond to questions regarding OSHA's resource managment.
With these systems in place OSHA could then operate a responsive, balanced health and safety program nationwide.
In another area, the OSHA Training Institute in Des Plaines, Ill., developed a Management Training Program for OSHA managers to acquaint them with new agency policies, objectives, and advanced management techniques.
During fiscal 1983, 250 OSHA managers attended this week-long, comprehensive management course.
OSHA's Regulatory Management System (RMS) established in 1982, is the means by which the agency ensures that safety and health standards are reviewed and issued in a thorough, timely fashion.
Procedures of the RMS aim at producing standards that protect workers both adequately and cost-effectively.
The backbone of the RMS is a four-step process developed for the issuance and review of standards.
It is consistent with key court decisions— especially the Supreme Court's landmark benzene ruling—and with the President's executive order on Federal regulation.
The fourstep process includes the following: (1) Establish that a hazard poses a significant risk; (2) show that the standard under consideration would substantially reduce that risk; (3) set the most protective exposure limit to the hazard that is economically and technologically feasible; and (4) issue requirements, such as engineering controls, personal protective equipment, and training, that achieve the regulatory goal in the most cost-effective way.
During the fiscal year, OSHA proposed to streamline and sharpen the focus of its rule on access to employee exposure and medical records.
By clarifying and tightening access provisions, the 'proposed changes are expected to encourage employers to monitor exposures and maintain records, safeguard trade secrets, and reduce compliance costs with no reduction in benefit to employees.
Public comment was called for in fiscal 1983 on the following health standards issues: (1) the relative merits of engineering controls and personal protective equipment in limiting worker exposure to air contaminants; (2) on the question of whether the agency should develop a proposed field sanitation standard for agricultural workers; and (3) on the parameters of standards for exposure to 4,4'-methylenedianiline and benzene.
During the year OSHA also changed its interpretation of the definition of coal tar pitch volatiles to exclude fumes from petroleum asphalt; it established an expedited variance system to allow small employers more time to comply with portions of the lead standard.
Although some health standards actions proceeded more slowly than anticipated, major actions (not necessarily final actions) were completed, particularly with regard to hazard communication to assure workers access to key safety data, and asbestos to reduce the permissible workplace exposure limit.
Also, new standards have been proposed for cotton dust, the fumigant ethylene dibromide, and for the sterilant ethylene oxide.
OSHA's standard on benzene exposure, revised in 1978, was set aside by the Supreme Court in 1980 on the basis that OSHA had demonstrated no reasonable relationship between the cost of compliance with the standard and reduction of risk to employees.
To restore protection for employees exposed to the cancer risks of benzene, the agency began work in fiscal 1983 on a new revision that it hopes to complete in 1984.
On March 8, 1983, OSHA issued an amendment to its hearing conservation standard to improve hearing protection for 5.1 million workers.
Revised requirements included provisions covering noise monitoring, hearing tests for workers, recordkeeping, and hearing protectors.
The hearing conservation amendment is a performance-oriented standard that continues to reduce workrelated hearing loss; permits employers more flexibilty in how they achieve the necessary protections; and results in annual cost savings of $81.4 million over the previous rule.
Standards on respirators and the agency's policy on the regulation of workplace carcinogens were under review.
After extensive experimental programs, guidelines were announced on alternative methods to protect workers from certain rotating drilling equipment as well as on ways to test worker protection techniques in the oil and gas well drilling industry.
OSHA also has called for comment to help improve its concrete construction standards, rules on commercial diving operations, and a regulation on powered platforms for hoisting personnel who work on exterior building maintenance.
Sixteen safety standards are targeted to be addressed by 1984—as many safety rules as the agency issued in the previous 11 years.
OSHA continued to focus inspections on high-hazard workplaces.
By giving top priority to both enforcement and consultation resources to companies in the most hazardous industries, OSHA can make the greatest possible impact on safety and health in the workplace.
Also, OSHA refined its traditional focus on hazardous industries by developing a method to target safety inspections on the most hazardous individual worksites in the manufacturing sector.
The inspection trigger is a worksite's mandatory log of injuries.
When OSHA inspectors arrive at the site of a high-hazard manufacturer, they first check the log.
If the lost-workday case rate, because of injury, is higher than the national average for all manufacturing, the inspector inspects.
If the rate is lower than average, the inspector usually terminates the inspection visit after meeting with management and labor representatives, answering all questions, and responding to worker complaints, if any.
This method enabled OSHA to make an impact on all the firms it visited and focused the full, more time-consuming walkaround inspections on those plants that really needed them.
During fiscal 1983, OSHA inspected 68,577 workplaces, exceeding its planned total for the year by 5,000.
Actual inspections accounted for 85 percent of the total, while OSHA's records reviews in companies with better than average injury rates accounted for the remaining 15 percent of companies visited.
Of the total inspections, 86 percent were "general schedule" inspections—those targeted by the agency toward companies in industries that have higher than average incidence rates for serious workplace injuries.
OSHA continued to emphasize inspections in the construction industry, the most hazardous of the major industry sectors the agency covers.
The 33,862 construction inspections OSHA conducted in fiscal 1983 represented 49 percent of the total, compared with 29,262 inspections and 48 percent for the same period in 1982.
OSHA began a special emphasis program for safety inspections of grain elevators in February 1983.
Selected elevators underwent complete safety checks to raise OSHA's profile in the industry and to promote management and labor attention to possible fire and explosion hazards.
Other improvements included a new policy for handling worker complaints, for citing repeat and General Duty Clause violations, and for citations at multiemployer worksites.
OSHA issued a code of professional conduct and a directive to be sure its inspectors not only cite violations, but offer suggestions on how a problem can be corrected.
Fewer followup inspections were reported this year, in keeping with the agency's policy of confirming hazard abatement (for other than serious, willful, and repeat violations) through telephone and written contact, rather than a second inspection.
In the past, fewer than 1 percent of these inspections resulted in citations for failure to abate previously cited hazards.
The 1,590 followup inspections in fiscal 1983 accounted for 2 percent of the total compared with 1,566 followup inspections and 3 percent in fiscal 1982.
Finally, OSHA continued to emphasize settlement agreements between its area directors and employers who disagreed with OSHA findings during inspections.
In fiscal 1980, 22 percent of all OSHA inspections with violations were contested by employers before the Ôccupational Safety and Health Review Commission.
While employers were not required to abate hazards that were the subject of a contest action, under the settlement agreement policy the current contest rate dropped to below 4_percent.
This allowed inspectors more time for inspections since they needed to spend less time in court.
More importantly, abatement of hazards occurred more speedily, thus protecting workers sooner.
OSHA's enforcement effort was better directed, better received, and more effective in reducing hazards than ever before.
The Office of Compliance Programming developed, established, and disseminated, through established channels and operating procedures, directives and guidelines necessary to ensure an effective and viable compliance and enforcement program.
The following describe several recent programs from the compliance office: (1) an instruction setting guidelines for commercial diving operations; (2) an instruction for enforcement of cargo gear regulations and the requirements for gear certification in the maritime program; (3) an instruction providing a Cotton Dust Manual establishing OSHA policy and procedures necessary for enforcing the cotton dust standard; (4) an instruction listing laboratories approved for blood lead sampling analysis in line with the requirements of the lead standard; (5) an instruction providing guidelines for the enforcement of Section 5(a)(1) of the OSH Act The General Duty Clause; and (6) an instruction implementing guidelines on de minimus violations that have no direct or immediate relationship to safety and health.
A new targeting system was initiated which enabled OSHA to identify 224 high-hazard Federal establishments that would now be scheduled for consultation or inspections.
Federal agencies were being integrated into the overall OSHA program in the field, with new procedures for handling complaints and fatality/catastrophe investigations.
The Presidential award program for Federal agencies with good safety and health programs was reinstituted during fiscal 1983.
The first place winners, based on size category, were the U.S. Postal Service, the smaller component agencies of the Department of Defense, and the Civil Aeronautics Board.
Employer-employee assistance was greatly emphasized during fiscal 1983 with the explicit goal of delivering a better balanced program of safety and health.
A system for prioritizing consultation requests was implemented, and improvements were initiated in the training of consultants and in the evaluation of consultant performance.
A seven-State experimental inspection exemption program based on a successful consultation visit was conducted during the year.
The experimental program, begun July 9, 1982, was available to some 835,000 workplaces employing 12.7 million people in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Texas.
Originally scheduled to end January 1983, it was extended until July 12, 1983, to permit further evaluation.
Based on the experiment's success, a nationwide expansion of the program will be proposed shortly.
Also comprehensive changes to the consultation regulations were drafted and will be proposed early in fiscal 1984.
In July 1982 a nationwide voluntary program was inaugurated to recognize firms with excellent safety and/or health programs.
Under the program, participants are exempted from routine inspections though workers and employers retain all rights and responsibilities under OSHA law.
The agency will continue to inspect worker complaints and any serious accidents at participating workplaces.
More than 20 agreements were signed in the fiscal year between OSHA and companies meeting the criteria of the new Voluntary Protection Programs.
Participants included: Combustion Engineering, Inc., Stamford, Conn. (11/10/82); Dravo Constructors, Inc., of Pittsburgh, Pa. (2/2/83); Georgia Power Company, Monroe County, Ga. (6/3/83); DuPont Company, Circleville, Ohio (6/20/83); and DeLisle, Miss. (6/20/83); Metco, Inc., Long Island, N.Y. (7/5/83); High Steel Structures, Inc., Lancaster, Pa. (5/4/83); and Hensel Phelps Construction Company, Denver, Colo. (8/17/83).
OSHA also undertook joint initiatives with ASARCO, Inc., the Kennecott Copper Corporation, and the United Steelworkers to develop cooperative agreements at seven U.S. smelters with significant arsenic exposures.
Agreements covering several plants were signed, and others will be completed shortly to determine appropriate worker protection control methods while maintaining the long-term profitability and competitiveness of the industry.
In addition, OSHA agreed to assist the American Electronics Association in designing job safety and health training programs for companies in the U.
During the year, a voluntary questionnaire was handed out by OSHA inspectors at firms inspected, encouraging employers and employee representatives to evaluate the professionalism of the agency's enforcement staff.
The questionnaire produced positive results.
An overwhelming percent of the questionnaires returned gave inspectors high marks for their professionalism and concern about safety and health matters.
In April 1983, OSHA began a nationwide campaign to improve worker protection against eye injuries, a project developed in cooperation with the National Society to Prevent Blindness.
The project included special information and education efforts as well as emphasis on eye safety during inspections.
OSHA's State program area is a good, cohesive operation that is now integrated into the overall OSHA program so that the 24 States and territories that are running their own ÖSHA program feel they are independent, and yet a part of a united policy approach for dealing with occupational safety and health issues.
The Federal staff assigned to monitor State plans, which was reduced in an earlier move, led to the establishment of a data-based system to monitor State program efforts.
During fiscal 1983, the agency continued work on perfecting the new data-based monitoring program.
By removing Federal compliance officers from States that operate their own safety and health program and transferring them to States where Federal OSHA administers this program, dual enforcement was eliminated.
In another area, a committee of representatives from States with their own OSHA programs was formed to develop alternative approaches to State safety and health standards for OSHA's consideration.
OSHA also convened a task force of State designees to provide input for revising State plan compliance staffing levels.
Under another cooperative program, 19 States have agreed to participate in the OSHA Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) thus assuring the availability of much more comprehensive data on State and Federal enforcement activities.
Certification of State programs in Nevada, Arizona, Indiana, the Virgin Islands, Washington, Puerto Rico, and Oregon brought the number of certified State programs to 21.
Certification is a necessary prerequisite before final OSHA approval can be granted to a State to operate its own program.
OSHA also signed operational status agreements with Minnesota, the Virgin Islands, New Mexico, Wyoming, Nevada, Arizona, Puerto Rico, Indiana, Virginia, and Iowa, thus removing concurrent Federal enforcement in all State-plan States.
Although no final approvals were granted to any State programs during fiscal 1983, proceedings were initiated for the Virgin Islands and Hawaii, and a public hearing was held to discuss final approval for the Virgin Islands'safety and health program.
During the year, all curricula at the OSHA Training Institute were revised to reflect increased training in professionalism, emphasis on voluntary protection programs, and the latest information in the occupational safety and health sciences.
Forty-six different courses were conducted at the Institute and in the field.
Staff at the Institute increased in 1983 to 38.
The number of trainees completing courses was 6,792 compared to 4,389 in 1982.
And the budget allocated for fiscal 1983 was $3,753,000, an increase from $2,051,500 in fiscal 1982.
To assure greater professionalism and uniformity among OSHA managers, an OSHA Management Institute was established as part of the Training Institute.
By the end of the fiscal year, 250 OSHA managers had completed this special management training tailored to OSHA's mission, policies, and goals.
Other training, education and consultation programs deserve mention: (1) OSHA reached agreement with the Tribal Council of the Navajo Nation to provide onsite consultation to businesses operating within the Nation, thereby providing enhanced worker protection to 100,000 Native Americans.
2) Major initiatives to improve workplace safety and health for 2.8 million Federal workers were announced; they focus on Government interaction, enforcement, consultation, training, and evaluation.
3) OSHA endorsed 45 vocational safety and health training programs developed by The Center for Occupational Research and Development (CORD) for use in vocational and secondary schools in fiscal 1983.
4) OSHA promoted development of new employee training programs to prevent explosions in grain-handling facilities.
As OSHA planned its health and training courses it paid special attention to ways to reduce the injury rate among new and inexperienced workers who suffer injuries at a much greater rate than their numbers would indicate.
In August 1983, OSHA announced the award of $3.02 million in job safety and health grants.
Under its New Directions grants program, OSHA awarded grants to 43 labor, management, academic, business, and other nonprofit groups delivering a variety of job safety and health services.
The grants were the latest annual awards to organizations that had received funding since 1980.
Fifty-eight other groups — first awarded grants in 1978 — also participated in the New Directions programs.
In all, OSHA provided $6.8 million in 1983 to 104 grantees.
In addition to OSHA funds, the New Directions program received substantial support from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and lesser amounts from the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH).
Responsibility for direct program management of New Directions was shifted from the national office to the regional offices.
This enabled OSHA staff to provide closer fiscal and program monitoring and established a higher level of accountabilty among grantees.
While protecting the rights of workers, the Employment Standards Administration's (ESA) program offices initiated and pursued both legislative and administrative changes in 1983 to maintain spending reductions, to curb fraud and abuse in all programs, and to reduce the paperwork burden on employers.
As a result of several significant initiatives in the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), case backlogs were eliminated which meant that allegations of discrimination were processed and resolved on a current basis.
Although OFCCP continued to emphasize conciliation to achieve compliance, it applied formal enforcement actions when necessary.
OFCCP encouraged the establishment of liaison groups of industry, employer, and constituency representatives to promote greater affirmative action efforts by contractors.
At the same time, OFCCP continued to develop a better understanding by all members of the public of the equal employment opportunity laws and ways in which to improve the compliance process.
The Wage and Hour Division was instrumental in obtaining enactment of the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA), an important law which provides necessary worker protections and yet eliminates the burdensome provisions that existed under the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act (FLCRA).
To strengthen its enforcement in this area, the Wage and Hour Division entered into formal Memoranda of Understanding with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and with the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) within the Department of Justice.
A number of criminal convictions were obtained involving involuntary servitude or peonage by persons who held migrant farmworkers in labor camps and forced them to work against their will.
The division also assisted the INS in obtaining convictions of farm labor contractors who employed illegal aliens.
In other areas of enforcement, the Wage and Hour Division conducted 64,214 compliance actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act which disclosed $114,010,000 owed by employers to 440,161 employees.
The division obtained restoration of $83,205,000 in back wages to 370,406 employees.
Hours and Safety Standards Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act — the division conducted 3,863 investigations and disclosed an all-time high of $23,053,000 in back wages and unpaid overtime due 46,733 workers.
During the year, employers agreed to pay $16,129,000 in unpaid wages and overtime to 38,770 employees.
The Wage and Hour Division continued research studies of the effects 'of pesticide exposure on the health of youths under 16 years working in agriculture.
Compliance investigations during the year disclosed 9,008 minors employed in violation of child labor provisions.
ESA's Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) established an interagency task force to draft a legislative proposal to amend the Federal Employees'Compensation Act.
The goals of this effort were (1) to create better incentives for employees to return to work after on-the-job injuries; (2) to curtail delays in claims determinations; (3) to eliminate inequities; and (4) to promote rehabilitation and reemployment of disabled beneficiaries.
The draft legislation was submitted to Congress in July 1983.
In implementing the amendments to the Black Lung Act of 1981, the OWCP published final regulations which provided for stricter eligibility requirements for black lung claims, an increase in the excise tax on coal to maintain the benefit program for miners, and the transfer of responsibility for benefit payments in certain cases from responsible coal mine operators to the Black Lung Trust Fund.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs conducted 4,303 compliance reviews of contractor facilities employing 3,085,791 workers.
The agency placed major emphasis upon more rapid response to complaints alleging discriminatory treatment.
OFCCP conducted 2,365 investigations of complaints and reduced the number of complaints on hand from 2,058 at the end of fiscal 1982 to 935 at the close of fiscal 1983.
In 425 agreements contractors committed a total of $13,143,081 in financial outlays for training, future pay increases, backpay, and increased recruitment.
Linkage"agreements to provide applicants for specific contractor job openings were reached between 1,085 employers and training service agents or other recruitment or referral sources.
OFCCP preferred a more positive, nonconfrontational approach in its mission, emphasizing conciliation to achieve compliance and providing technical assistance to employers as they met their contractual obligations.
In fiscal year 1983, technical assistance was given to 5,358 contractors outside of the compliance review process.
Assistance included helping contractors to arrange internal or external training and locating recruitment and referral sources.
During fiscal 1983, OFCCP continued to encourage the establishment of liaison groups of industry, employer, and constituency representatives.
Significant progress was made in forming liaison groups with a broad spectrum of parties interested in the compliance process, namely employers, women's organizations, apprenticeship and training groups, handicapped persons, representatives of specific industries or worker skills, academics and State agencies, as well as a cross section of these interest groups by geographical area.
The groups were designed to promote greater affirmative action efforts by contractors and a better understanding of the equal opportunity laws by all members of the public.
These groups explored general compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
They contributed valuable input to OFCCP on ways to improve the compliance process and to address aspects of affirmative action unique to their employment situations or industries.
OFCCP, in turn, provided advice, specific technical assistance, and an exchange of information.
By the end of fiscal 1983, 188 liaison groups had been formed.
OFCCP undertook several significant initiatives that resulted in greater program outputs.
1. A Nonconstruction Contractor Selection System was designed to select contractors for review based upon such standards as previous EEO performance as determined by recent EEO profiles and historical trends, recency and frequency of past reviews, prospects for employment growth, and other criteria.
2. A Case Management System was designed to improve field performance by ensuring the timely completion of compliance actions and more efficient use of staff resources.
Tight controls and a monitoring system to track the processing of cases/reviews to completion resulted in more timely completed compliance actions and a reduction in the number of hours required to conduct compliance actions.
3. Training Programs were designed to enhance the professional skills of compliance officers and to assist them in developing the investigatory skills necessary to discharge their responsibilities in a fair, objective manner.
To this end, OFCCP developed and delivered to 403 staff members a series of courses that addressed the needs of investigators at all experience levels, from "new hire"through senior investigators.
4. The Complaint Intake System was designed to reduce the time needed to determine OFCCP jurisdiction over a complaint; reduce the number of complaints erroneously accepted; and reduce the number of nonmeritorious complaints requiring OFCCP investigation.
To permit quicker jurisdictional determination, OFCCP revised its complaint form to request more relevant information in conjunction with increased emphasis on the intake interview with complainants.
To reduce complaints erroneously accepted, OFCCP issued clearer standards for screening complaints.
To permit an early effort at resolution through contractor internal complaint procedures and to reduce complaints requiring OFCCP investigations, the agency provided the contractor with a copy of the complaint immediately upon establishment of jurisdiction.
Other management initiatives include the physical and administrative consolidation of some field offices; the reorganization of the OFCCP national office; elimination of complaint case backlogs, resulting in the processing and resolution of allegations of discrimination on a current basis; and case quality assurance based on comprehensive and thorough investigative content with consistent application of regulations and procedures.
Timely response to the 44,869 complaints received under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) during fiscal 1983 was the cornerstone of the Wage and Hour Division's FLSA enforcement strategy.
The Division conducted 64,214 compliance actions under FLSA, of which 43,313 were initiated as a result of complaints from workers and concerned citizens.
The inventory of complaints increased from 15,756 to 19,089.
The FLSA enforcement program disclosed $40.2 million due 218,409 workers as a result of minimum wage violations, and $73.9 million due 267,730 employees as a result of overtime violations.
Employers agreed to pay $26.9 million in unpaid minimum wages to 172,698 workers and $56.4 million to 232,272 employees due overtime pay.
Employers agreed to restore a total of $83.3 million in FLSA back wages in fiscal 1983.
The difference between the amount of back wages found due employees and the amount that employers agreed to pay reflects, for the most part, sums involved in pending litigation and the refusal of certain employers to pay back wages in cases which the department deemed unsuitable for litigation.
FLSA permits individuals to bring private suits to collect back wages, liquidated damages, attorney's fees, and court costs.
The Department's enforcement statistics do not include the back wage amounts recovered in such private suits.
A vital component of FLSA enforcement is the Special Targeted Enforcement Program (STEP) which is aimed at discouraging employers from employing illegal aliens at unlawful wages.
Under this program, the Wage and Hour Division conducts FLSA investigations in industries and localities where illegal aliens have traditionally been found to be employed.
The purpose is to reduce the incentive for hiring these workers who tend to accept employment at less than the minimum wage and/or without proper overtime compensation.
In fiscal 1983, 18,682 STEP investigations were conducted.
The Wage and Hour Division found 9,008 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of FLSA during fiscal 1983.
The division assessed more than $830,000 in child labor civil money penalties against 567 employers who were found to be illegally employing 5,050 minors.
One hundred and thirty-one exceptions were filed with the Wage and Hour Administration contending that penalties should not have been assessed and requesting a hearing before an administrative law judge.
Research studies continued on the effects of pesticide exposure on the health of youths under 16 years working in agriculture.
The studies are conducted under an Interagency Agreement between the Department of Labor and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Of special concern was development of pesticide standards necessary in order for 10- and 11-year-old hand harvesters of short season crops to be employed under a waiver provision enacted in the FLSA Amendments of 1977.
Analysis of comments from interested parties on a proposed amendment to Child Labor Regulation 3, which sets employment standards for 14- and 15-year-old minors, was completed and a new proposed revision will appear in the Federal Register.
The development of information concerning industries involved in Hazardous Occupations Order #10, which deals with slaughtering, meat-packing, meat-processing, and rendering occupations, and the retail sale of meat products, continued throughout the year.
A proposal to amend this order will be published in the Federal Register.
To prevent the curtailment of opportunities for employment, the Fair Labor Standards Act authorizes the Secretary to provide for the employment of certain categories of workers at special minimum wages below the statutory minimum wage.
These workers include, under certain conditions, learners, apprentices, messengers, handicapped workers, and full-time students when employed in retail or service establishments, agriculture, or institutions of higher education.
Authorization is granted by certificate.
The division issued 42,162 certificates during fiscal 1983 authorizing the employment of approximately 427,212 workers at less than the minimum wage.
Compared with figures from fiscal 1982, these figures indicate declines of 3 and 1 percent, respectively.
Full-time students and handicapped workers in sheltered workshops accounted for 56 and 40 percent of the positions authorized, respectively.
The division analyzed the comments received as a result of a proposal to amend the full-time student regulations to allow the administrator of the division to designate the effective period of certificates authorizing the employment of full-time students.
Under the current regulations, certificates may not be issued with effective periods longer than 1 year.
A new proposal will be published in the Federal Register following the analysis of the comments.
The Secretary's Advisory Committee on Sheltered Workshops met in October 1982 and May 1983 to consider, as well as other matters, the need for revising the regulations governing the authorization of special lower minimum wages for handicapped workers employed by sheltered workshops.
The committee provided advice and recommendations to the Secretary on the administration and enforcement of the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Public Contracts Act, and the Service Contract Act as these laws applied to the employment of handicapped workers by sheltered workshops and hospitals and institutions.
In conjunction with the removal of the restrictions on homework in the knitted outerwear industry in 1981, the Department undertook a concerted compliance effort in homework to determine whether further changes in the regulations governing the restrictions on homework were warranted.
The Secretary's action removing the restrictions in the knitted outerwear industry was challenged in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia (Civil Action No. 81-2606) by the International Ladies'Garment Workers' Union and others.
The District Court upheld the Secretary's action.
An appeal of that action was heard on September 12, 1983.
Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA) replaced the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act (FLCRA) effective April 14, 1983.
This Administration bill was developed as the result of lengthy discussions with agricultural employer and farm worker representatives.
MSPA provides a number of important worker protections, including vehicle safety, housing safety and health requirements, disclosure of wages, hours and working conditions; maintenance of necessary records; and a provision to provide workers with itemized information concerning pay and withholding.
The act distinguishes between the traditional crewleader and the fixed-situs agricultural employer, thereby eliminating the burdersome provisions that existed under FLCRA which had required some agricultural employers to register as crewleaders with the Department of Labor.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted 4,201 investigations under FLCRA and MSPA this fiscal year.
Violations were found in 3,011 of these investigations.
Civil money penalties in the amount of $872,000 were assessed against violators.
Collections on penalty assessments amounted to over $331,000.
Investigations that uncovered evidence of possible criminal violation of other statutes, including the Civil Rights Act, continued to be referred to the Department of Justice.
This cooperation— continuing under MSPA—resulted in three criminal convictions involving involuntary servitude or peonage by persons who held migrant farmworkers in labor camps and forced them to work against their will.
The MSPA, as did FLCRA, prohibited a farm labor contractor from knowingly employing illegal aliens.
Cooperation between the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Wage and Hour Division served to deter the use of these workers in agricultural employment.
In fiscal 1983, 130 farm labor contractors were cited for employing a total of 1,072 illegal alien workers.
The National Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committee and regional coordination committees continued their functions in accordance with Federal regulations established under the settlement agreement in NAACP v. Marshall.
Under this agreement, the regional and national offices of the Employment Standards Administraton, the Employment and Training Administration, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration work to coordinate programs and services that have impact on migrant and seasonal agricultural workers.
Government contract ·enforcement concentrated on complaints alleging violations of the various laws that provide labor standards for employees performing Government contract work.
During fiscal 1983, 3,845 investigations were conducted under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the Service Contract Act, the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Back wages found due 46,536 workers under the provisions of these laws totaled a new all-time high of $23 million.
Employers agreed to pay $16 million of these back wage amounts to 38,567 workers.
Additional monies were to be restored upon completion of an administrative hearing or litigation action.
Pursuant to the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, 13,584 prevailing wage determinations were issued during the fiscal year.
Of this total, 1,297 were general determinations published in the Federal Register which apply to many construction contracts in a given geographic area, and 12,287 were issued for specific construction projects.
Various alternatives for improving the collection of wage data used in making Davis-Bacon wage determinations continued to be explored.
In an important victory for the Department and the Administration's regulatory reform efforts, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Distict of Columbia Circuit, on July 5, 1983, largely reversed a District Court ruling.
That ruling had enjoined certain major provisions of the Department's May 1982 revised Davis-Bacon regulations in a suit filed by the Building and Construction Trades Department AFL-CIO, and a number of individual unions.
While the enjoined provisions had been deferred pending the conclusion of all appeals in the matter, those portions of the new rules not at issue in the suit, as well as the new regulation redefining the "prevailing wage"were republished on April 29, 1983 and took effect on June 28, 1983.
The former "30 percent rule,"on which a preliminary injunction had been lifted, was eliminated.
These newly adopted rules were expected to reduce Government construction costs by an estimated $120 million annually.
The Wage-Hour Division issued 4,725 determinations of prevailing wages and fringe benefits for a wide variety of job classifications under the Service Contract Act.
These job determinations apply to 36,517 contracts.
In fiscal 1983, the Division of Federal Employees' Compensation (DFEC) undertook a comprehensive review of program needs, culminating in a proposal to significantly amend the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA).
This would accomplish major improvements in the administration of debt collection, identification of abuses of the program, management of accounts, case management, and medical payments.
New accountability standards were applied in reviews of the 15 field officers.
Cooperation with other Federal agencies continued with the goals of reducing costs, processing claims more efficiently, and training agency personnel to give correct information to employees and to the Office of Workers'Compensation Programs.
A proposal to amend the FECA was submitted to Congress in July 1983.
Its adoption would create better incentives for employees to return to work following on-the-job injuries, address delays in claims determination, eliminate inequities in compensation entitlement, and promote the rehabilitation and reemployment of disabled beneficiaries.
Despite the pressures of increased costs as a result of Federal employee pay raises and escalating medical costs, the cost control efforts continued to keep the total benefit payout under $1 billion.
The total FEC benefit fund payout for the 1983 chargeback fiscal year (July 1, 1982, to June 30, 1983) was $916,628,000.
The 15 FEC district offices were reviewed in fiscal 83 under a completely revised accountability process emphasizing an evaluation of problem solving and use of resources by district office management.
The new flexibility of the review process allowed in-depth evaluation of areas identified for special attention.
A broad evaluation was made of all aspects of district office operations, taken from both MIS and other ADP sources and from on-site inspection.
The resulting reports provided a valuable planning tool for local management and identified needed program improvements at the national level.
In accordance with GAO and Treasury guidelines, DFEC published extensive procedures to improve its administration of accounts, to ensure that collections from settlements against responsible third parties were pursued and reported.
Guidance was also provided for reviewing accounts to determine the cost effectiveness of further collection action, for closing uncollectible accounts, and for identifying debts that could be recovered through administrative and salary offset and compensation benefit offset.
An agreement with slight modifications was continued with the Postal Service to identify and pursue liability in minor injuries to mail carriers.
The medical bill payment system used to pay claims submitted by covered Federal employees and their physicians was revised to provide greater security and accountability, and to prepare for the anticipated adoption of a medical fee schedule.
Under this revised system, DFEC is able to capture information about individual medical procedures performed, using the AMA's Current Procedural Terminology Code.
Medical payments are restricted to providers whose names and addresses have been verified, and who have been entered, by Employer Identification Number, into its Provider Index.
A screening program, giving computerized access to this Index and to information about the claimant, is used to identify bills submitted by unverified or unlicensed providers, bills for cases not in payable status, and bills submitted for reimbursement to unverified addresses.
These are routed for authorization or returned without payment.
Medical providers suspended or excluded from Medicare participation, and providers against whom licensing actions have been taken by their State medical boards, are identified for each region through national directives, and are flagged for attention in the automated payment system.
DFEC is proposing regulations to exclude providers from the Federal Employees' Compensation Program for fraud against Medicare or other benefit programs, and for documented abuses such as overcharging and overtreating.
Computer matches were used to identify possible abuses of the program.
A match of FECA benefit rolls against the rolls of Civil Service annuitants identified persons receiving prohibited dual benefits.
FECA total disability rolls were also matched with State unemployment insurance records in Pennsylvania and Missouri, and benefit payment records in New York, to identify recipients with unreported earnings.
The State of Ohio will participate in a similar match.
Over 100 of DFEC's case development letters were placed in an automated correspondence program linked to computer files of case information, considerably reducing clerical workloads and printing and warehousing costs, and making texts more flexible and usable.
The Federal Employees'Compensation Act provides for a reduction of benefits to a partially disabled employee, based on actual earnings in a job suitable to the degree of disability, or on a documented earning capacity.
Rehabilitation with actual placement in a job, whether in the private or public sector, is greatly to the advantage of the disabled employee, as well as cost effective for the program.
Based on information gleaned from the Low Pack/Early Medical Referral Project undertaken with the U.S. Postal Service in four district offices, and from periodic roll studies done in the last 3 years, DFEC has reevaluated its procedures for identifying and managing traumatic injury cases which may result in permanent or long-term disability.
Techniques for selecting those cases that would profit from early intervention, obtaining specialist examinations where needed, and providing counseling and reemployment services for employees unable to return to their original positions have been disseminated to regional management and will be implemented programwide early in fiscal 1984.
An Interagency Task Force was formed to address recommendations made by the Office of Inspector General to the President's Council for Efficiency and Integrity to improve agency administration of claims.
The Task Force assisted in drafting the legislative proposal and commented on regulatory needs for the program.
It produced recommendations to OMB and OPM to encourage staffing of compensation specialist jobs in agencies, to improve claims oversight, and to control costs.
Under an agreement with DFEC, TVA was piloting a project whereby TVA processed and paid bills on injury claims when the employee had lost no time from work, saving OWCP the administrative cost associated with establishing a claim file.
Bills were paid faster because they were paid directly by the agency without forwarding to OWCP.
Lost time injuries were still handled by OWCP.
Training of examiners was an area of fruitful concentration of resources in fiscal 1983.
With the assistance of ESA training, a module on obtaining and evaluating medical evidence was designed for the Advanced Claims Examiner Training Course and delivered in sessions in New York and San Francisco.
When examiner difficulties in developing and writing statements of accepted facts were identified as a national problem through accountability reviews, a new 2-day course was developed and delivered to 75 supervisory claims examiners, who in turn are training examiners in each district office.
The Basic Claims Examiner Course was given to 55 examiners during the year, and the advanced course to 63.
The Department of the Army sponsored compensation training by OWCP personnel for 134 personnel specialists from all of its major commands.
DFEC delivered.a training module to 390 postal injury compensation specialists, in 30 sessions of the 2-week course given at the Postal Service Management Academy.
DFEC also participated in the OPM employee benefits course and took part in five quarterly sessions.
In fiscal 1984, training will be delivered across the country to 10,000 first-line supervisors of the U.S. Army Materiel Development and Readiness Command (DARCOM).
On May 31, 1983, the final rules were published implementing changes to the Black Lung Benefits Act as a result of enactment of the Black Lung Benefits Revenue Act of 1981 and the Black Lung Benefits Amendments of 1981.
Some of the changes the amendments provided were stricter eligibility requirements, an increase in the excise tax on coal, and the transfer of payment in certain cases from responsible mine operators to the Trust Fund.
As a result of the legislative changes, the percentage of claims found eligible for benefits was reduced.
Of the division's 13,398 initial findings issued under the 1981 amendments, the approval rate for those claims was only 4.2 percent.
A new automated claim information and benefit payment system became operational in fiscal 1983.
With the increased cost of medical care and a greater volume of medical bills being received, bill processing had become one of the division's major efforts, having doubled since the previous fiscal year.
During fiscal 1983, the division made significant reimbursements to the United Mine Workers'Health and Retirement Funds for black lung-related medical expenses since the Trust Fund is the primary payor.
The division expects additional medical reimbursements to other third parties in fiscal years 1984 and 1985.
The task of preparing cases for a hearing at the Office of Administrative Law Judges (OALJ) was transferred out of the national office into the district offices.
The division prepared 7,131 claims for a formal hearing and forwarded them to the OALJ.
The program's workload included the following cases: 9,454 new claim filings; 4,701 claim refilings; 7,000 cases pending decisions; 5,643 cases that the OALJ returned to the division; 2,862 informal conferences held; 113,000 claims for which the Trust Fund is paying Section 11 Medical Benefits Only; 92,000 Trust Fund monthly benefit claims in pay status; and 8,135 cases in which responsible mine operators pay monthly benefits and medical benefits only.
The division recovered over $20 million from responsible mine operators, insurance carriers, beneficiaries, and medical providers as a result of debt collection activities.
Newly established debt collection targets were assigned throughout the division.
Approximately $632 million in benefits were paid to coal miners, surviving dependents, and medical providers.
Also included in this figure were reimbursements to responsible mine operators under the 1981 amendments, half of which were paid in fiscal 1983.
Total Trust Fund obligations for fiscal 1983 amounted to $860 million.
Income from the coal tax, repayable advances from the General Fund, and collections from responsible mine operators totalled approximately $493 million, $358 million, and $9 million, respectively.
At the end of the fiscal year, the outstanding Trust Fund debt was approximately $2.1 billion.
During fiscal 1983, the Division of Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation (DLHWC) made steady progress in providing more timely service under the provisions of the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act.
Approximately 63 percent of the informal conferences, which were requested for resolving disputed matters, were completed within 45 days of receipt of the requests.
This represented a 6 percent improvement in the timely processing of those cases over performance in fiscal 1982.
A total of over 7,500 conferences were held by district offices of the division.
The division's district offices also reduced their inventories of cases awaiting action by 20 percent during fiscal 1983.
An accelerated accountability review program was carried out during the fiscal year, wherein 70 percent of the district offices came under national office review.
Uniformity in application of program procedures, as well as the quality and timeliness of case actions, were stressed.
Internal operating improvements were introduced during fiscal 1983 to improve program efficiency.
The division's district offices converted from a traditional file cabinet storage system to an open shelving TAB system.
This system was designed to reduce filing errors and aid in case record retrieval.
The system also provided for more efficient use of available space.
Progress was made during the fiscal year toward automation in the district offices.
Functional requirements for an automated data processing case management and information system were defined and operational implementation in the district offices can begin the latter part of fiscal 1984.
The system will provide automated case review, case tracking, and word processing capability.
It will result in more timely case reviews and responses to inquiries, as well as more efficient work flow in the district offices.
The Division of Vocational Rehabilitation continued to increase the quality, quantity, and timeliness of vocational rehabilitation services during fiscal 1983, thereby reducing human loss and compensation costs.
During the year, 842 injured Federal workers under the Federal Employees'Compensation Act were rehabilitated, saving more than $11,000 per worker in compensation costs.
Total savings for the year were $9.3 million in compensation costs.
Also in fiscal 1983, 254 injured workers in the private sector were rehabilitated under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers Compensation Act, for savings of more than $9,000 per worker in compensation costs.
Total compensation costs saved for the year were $2.3 million.
The Office of State Liaison and Legislative Analysis was established in 1982 to provide assistance to the States and to coordinate Federal-State activities in the areas of workers'compensation, labor standards, and equal employment opportunity.
The office also serves as a link between the major ESA programs and related State programs, and facilitates cooperation in legislative and regulatory matters.
The office contains three divisions: the Division of Legislative Analysis, the Division of State Employment Standards Programs, and the Division of State Workers'Compensation Programs.
The Division of Legislative Analysis developed testimony and background information for ESA officials who appeared at hearings before committees of the Senate and House of Representatives.
It developed papers used in legislative policymaking and regulatory materials required under E.O. 12291.
The division was instrumental in efforts leading to the enactment on January 14, 1983 of the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act.
It also played an important role in developing an Administration bill to reform the Federal Employees'Compensation Act.
The bill was transmitted to the Congress on July 27, 1983.
The division also prepared explanatory materials for use in briefing Congressional staff and liaison staff of Federal agencies.
The Division of State Employment Standards Programs provided ESA with expertise on State labor standards laws and programs, and on issues that affect or are affected by all ESA programs, except workers' compensation.
In the promotion of improved coordination between Federal and State programs in similar fields, considerable information was developed on State employment standards relating to child labor, youth minimum wages, and industrial homework.
The division is compiling information on State affirmative action requirements for employment of handicapped persons.
The division provided technical advisory assistance and information on numerous labor standards subjects in response to over 400 requests from State labor departments, management organizations, multi-State employers, organized labor, other Federal agencies, the Congress, and others.
Throughout the year, the division maintained active working relationships with State governmental labor officials and their organizations.
It analyzed some 950 new State labor laws and published summaries of approximately 325 of these.
The Division of State Workers' Compensation Programs provided State workers' compensation agencies with onsite technical assistance to help them improve their information, rehabilitation, and administrative systems.
It worked closely with State legislatures and advisory committees in preparing and evaluating proposed legislation.
During fiscal 1983, the division provided analyses for 190 amendments to State workers'compensation laws.
An outcome of this effort was the publication of a set of comparative tables on significant provisions in these laws entitled State Workers'Compensation Laws.
In fiscal year 1983, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) continued working to reduce on-the-job accidents and occupational illnesses among the Nation's miners.
To achieve these goals, the agency used a combination of methods including inspection, technical and training assistance, conferences, and other voluntary activities.
Central to its efforts was the principle that mine safety and health progress requires constant dialogue and teamwork among management, labor, other sectors of the mining community, and government.
The industry's safety record was improving in fiscal 1983.
There were 131 mining fatalities during this time, compared with 237 in fiscal 1982.
Rates of fatal and nonfatal injuries were also on the decline.
However, a coal mine explosion, on June 21, 1983, killed seven miners, drawing national attention to mine safety issues.
MSHA began intensive investigation into the cause of the explosion.
At the end of the fiscal year, a report was in preparation.
Fiscal 1983 was MSHA's first complete fiscal year under a major reorganization that took place in May 1982.
In this administrative change, inspectors'supervisors were given responsibility for holding conferences, at either management's or labor's request, to discuss citations written during an inspection.
In addition, activities related to miner training were transferred to MSHA's district organizations, whose main focus previously had been inspections.
Revised regulations on civil penalties for violations were coordinated with the reorganization.
In fiscal 1983, the new conference and penalty procedures were.functioning smoothly, and training specialists became active in providing consultative assistance to mines in their districts.
During the year, MSHA pursued several programs designed to improve miners'safety and health through cooperation among management, labor, others in the mining community, and State agencies.
MSHA's Non-Fatal Days Lost (NFDL) program for coal mines and the Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) for metal and nonmetal mines provided extra consultative assistance, involving both management and labor, to selected mines with accident rates higher than the national average.
Mines in these programs achieved substantial improvement in their accident records.
At the operator's request, metal and nonmetal mines also received Compliance Assistance Visits (CAV's), on which MSHA inspectors identified potential violations before an operation was opened or reopened, without penalties resulting.
After such visits, most violations were corrected before the mine's next regular inspection.
MSHA vigorously promoted the voluntary Holmes Safety Association, whose meetings can bring management, labor, inspectors, and others together to discuss safety on a regular basis.
Membership in the association grew to more than 295,000.
Special conferences were another means used to involve management, labor, and government in identifying and solving problems in mine safety and health.
The district organizations held joint mine health and safety conferences in 10 locations around the country from November 1982 through April 1983, and many other regional meetings were held by subdistrict and field offices.
The Second National Joint Mine Safety and Health Conference was held in June 1983 and a second round of regional conferences was planned for fiscal 1984.
In November 1982, a first-time conference with MSHA and State officials responsible for mine safety was held to promote cooperative mine safety efforts.
Early and effective public participation was encouraged in several regulatory review projects that MSHA had under way during the fiscal year, with the goal of updating and clarifying current rules and making them more effective.
Numerous drafts of revised regulations were offered for public comment before the formal proposal stage.
These included drafts covering seven priority sections of the regulations on metal and nonmetal mine safety and health; three sections of the underground coal mine safety standards; and an alternate procedure for approval of certain mining equipment.