As the Nation's economy continued to improve and unemployment continued its steady decline in fiscal year 1984, the Department of Labor, under the leadership of Secretary of Labor Raymond J. Donovan, continued to improve the effectiveness of services delivered.
Legislation, regulatory changes, internal management improvements and new policy and program initiatives enhanced the Department's ability to reach and serve its constituencies.
The year was highlighted by completion of the first full operating year of the landmark Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), the 10th anniversary of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), and the 100th anniversary of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
All these events illustrate the key role this Department plays in ensuring the well-being of America's workers.
The Department continued to assist special groups of workers who were not fully sharing in the economic recovery.
Among these groups were economically disadvantaged youths and adults, workers displaced from jobs by technology advances or economic changes in their industries, the growing ranks of women workers, and veterans.
Under JTPA, business owners and executives serving on local Private Industry Councils directed training programs for jobless adults, young people, and displaced workers in almost 600 service delivery areas across the country.
JTPA is the first Federal employment and training program specifically designed to encourage private sector participation.
Rather than being an income maintenance program, JTPA emphasizes training and utilizes the knowledge and expertise of the business men and women throughout the United States to design training which will provide necessary job skills to thousands of our Nation's unemployed.
The program served more than 615,000 persons under title II and more than 96,000 persons under title III during a 9-month transition period from October 1983 through June 1984.
Placement rates under both titles were considerably higher than those achieved under JTPA's predecessor, the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act.
The great majority of JTPA enrollees who benefited in 1984 were economically disadvantaged.
In an effort to gain an additional tool for combatting persistent and severe youth unemployment, the Administration proposed and strongly advocated enactment of the Youth Employment Opportunity Wage.
The bill, which the Department estimated would create almost 400,000 new jobs for youth each summer, would allow employers to hire young people at a special minimum wage of $2.50 an hour during the months of May through September.
The bill received broad-based support from such groups as the National Conference of Black Mayors, the National Association of Minority Contractors, the National Federation of Independent Businesses and the Printing Industries of America.
The Department plans to build on this consensus and will seek the bill's passage during the next session of Congress.
Also, a major effort was launched to relieve severe, long-term unemployment among Korean and Vietnam-era veterans with enactment of the Emergency Veterans' Job Training Act.
Administering the new law in conjunction with the Veterans Administration, the Department conducted outreach activities to employers and veterans.
These efforts resulted in the location of 19,000 jobs for veterans during the year.
Emphasis was renewed on other veterans' employment and training programs during the year, particularly those serving younger and disabled veterans.
With women entering the labor force at the rate of more than 1 million a year, the Department's Women's Bureau continued to address the unique problems of special groups, including economically disadvantaged and unskilled women unable to find jobs, women executives held back in their careers, and working mothers needing high-quality, affordable child care.
Specific Women's Bureau activities ranged from programs to improve training and employment opportunities for women to economic research initiatives and information sharing about women.
For example, the Bureau held a series of 20 workshops around the country to promote understanding of JTPA's potential for improving women's economic status.
In its continuing effort to increase the availability of childcare services for working women, the Bureau worked with the White House Office on Private Sector Initiatives to encourage employers to provide or assist in child-care arrangements for employees; for the third year in a row, the Bureau provided funds for a Rockefeller Foundation project allowing community-based organizations to demonstrate effective ways of providing child care to low-income female household heads.
As part of its ongoing effort to promote young women's awareness of and preparation for careers in nontraditional occupations, the Bureau worked with public school personnel and other community representatives to institutionalize the concept of nontraditional career options in schools.
Other Bureau activities included programs, seminars, workshops, studies and technical assistance dealing with a wide range of issues affecting such groups as rural women, women offenders, displaced homemakers, dislocated women workers, women in high-technology occupations, and immigrant and refugee women.
As ERISA marked its 10th anniversary, the Department took a number of actions to strengthen and improve its administration of this vital law which benefits all Americans who rely on the financial security offered by private pension and welfare benefit plans.
Numerous ERISA regulatory improvements were proposed and/or completed during the year.
ERISA enforcement was increased, resulting in recovery of some $92 million for employee benefit plans, 56 percent more than was recovered in fiscal 1983.
A major pension victory was achieved for women during the year with President Reagan's signing of the Administrationsupported Retirement Equity Act.
The new law significantly improves the vesting of women's pension rights in private pension plans and ensures their right to benefits received by a spouse.
In recognition of the importance of the Nation's multibilliondollar private pension system, the Secretary established the National Pension Forum to review the Department's effectiveness in carrying out ERISA and to recommend improvements.
He also elevated the Office of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs (OPWBP), which administers ERISA, and made it part of the Office of the Secretary; it had formerly been part of the Labor-Management Services Administration (LMSA).
To enhance the role of another key Department program that had been part of LMSA, the Office of Labor-Management Cooperation was renamed the Bureau of Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative Programs and assigned to report to the Office of the Under Secretary.
The remaining LMSA unit, renamed the Office of Labor-Management Standards, strengthened the Department's commitment to preventing improper or corrupt labor practices by almost doubling the number of convictions and pretrial settlements for Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act violations and by boosting the number of embezzlement investigations and compliance audits.
Enforcement was also vigorously pursued in other Department programs.
The Óccupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) conducted more than 70,000 inspections, the highest total since 1976; more than 85 percent of these inspections were targeted on highhazard industries and worksites.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) conducted more than 77,000 coal mine inspections and more than 13,000 metal and nonmetal mine inspections.
MSHA inspectors also made numerous special mine visits to explore the reason for increases in certain types of fatal accidents and to discuss safe practices with mine labor and management.
The Émployment Standards Administration's (ESA) Wage and Hour Division conducted more than 64,000 compliance actions during the year; more than 44,000 of these were based on employee complaints under Federal minimum wage, overtime, child labor and other wage and hour standards.
ESA's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs conducted a record number of compliance reviews during the year.
ESA laid the groundwork in fiscal 1984 for a major rule change that would allow employees in the knitted outerwear industry the freedom to work in their homes while still enabling the Department to monitor wage and hour law compliance.
The Department's enforcement agencies took a number of significant regulatory actions in fiscal 1984.
OSHA issued several final standards to protect workers, including new rules governing hazard communication, exposure to ethylene oxide and servicing of single-and multi-piece rim wheels.
Other OSHA standards proposed during the year covered sanitation facilities for farm workers, oil and gas well drilling and servicing, crane and derrick hoisting, accident prevention tags, and safety testing and certification.
MSHA continued to review mine safety and health rules and proposed or issued new standards to improve worker protections.
A new final rule updated and consolidated standards for wire ropes used to hoist both miners and materials.
Major reviews continued on eight groups of metal and nonmetal mining standards and underground coal mine regulations.
These reviews were aimed at updating and clarifying regulations, closing gaps and removing unnecessarily burdensome provisions.
Among others, proposed rules were published for fire protection, machinery and equipment, and ground control.
As the fiscal year ended, final rules were being prepared on these subjects.
Proposed rules were being prepared on loading, hauling and dumping; gassy mines, electricity and air quality.
In all of the Department's regulatory and enforcement programs, efforts focused on working more closely and cooperatively with labor and management to achieve voluntary compliance.
These efforts have consistently helped the Department obtain redress for workers and often resulted in swift correction of violations without costly and time-consuming litigation.
In the past few years, the Department's efforts to reduce its adversarial relationships with employers and to foster greater labor-management-government cooperation have also contributed to an improved labormanagement climate.
For example, as OSHA has shifted from a confrontational to a more cooperative enforcement approach that emphasizes training, consultation and self-correction of hazards, the safety record of American workplaces has improved dramatically.
The latest figures show that injury and illness rates declined from 9.5 per 100 full-time workers in 1979 to 7.6 in 1983, the lowest level ever recorded.
Contested citations have also declined dramatically.
In fiscal year 1980, about 22 percent of all OSHA inspections in which citations were issued were contested.
By 1984, the contest rate had dropped to only 2.5 percent.
A similar approach by MSHA in conjunction with mine labor and management coincided with an all time low of 131 mining fatalities in fiscal 1983 and 163 in fiscal 1984—far below fatality figures of earlier years even though mine employment and production have been on the rise.
Cooperation among parties in the private sector is particularly vital in allowing the Department to target its limited inspection resources on the most serious problems facing workers.
Our experience demonstrates that when we succeed in attaining a mutual commitment to compliance from labor and management, we significantly increase the likelihood of compliance and achieve better protection for workers at less cost to taxpayers.
The concept of establishing public-private partnerships to achieve public policy objectives, such as those demonstrated under JTPA and the Department's enforcement programs in fiscal 1984, will become increasingly important as the Reagan Administration continues to improve government efficiency.
The Department made major contributions to the Administration's effort to reduce Federal spending in fiscal 1984 through cost-saving management improvements, space and personnel reductions and an active internal and external audit and investigation program conducted by the Office of Inspector General (OIG).
Continued progress was made in reducing waste, fraud and abuse in Federal programs.
For example, new case management procedures were used to eliminate waste, fraud and abuse in federally administered workers' compensation programs.
The Administration supported amendments to the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act, which provided for debarment of medical providers and other penalties in instances of fraud.
In addition to working with the Justice Department in conducting labor racketeering investigations that brought 123 convictions and 98 indictments in fiscal 1984, the OIG helped obtain 258 convictions and 438 indictments for various types of fraud in the Department's own operations and programs.
Both the Department's Employees'Compensation Appeals Board and Benefits Review Board reported substantial increases in efficiency and productivity in handling a large volume of workers'compensation cases during the year.
Also, through its Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB), the Department was involved in the broader task of assuring that the interests of American workers are addressed in U.S. foreign affairs.
In addition to entering into cooperative agreements with or providing technical assistance to other countries, ILAB participated in numerous international activities and discussions dealing with foreign trade and economic policy.
The bureau also continued to exert leadership on behalf of the United States in international organizations devoted to economic and human rights issues affecting labor.
As has been the case since its creation as a separate Cabinet-level agency in 1913, the Department of Labor this year continued "to foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners of the United States," as required by its original enabling legislation.
During 1984, emphasis was placed on the Reagan Administration's goals for delivering better and more cost-effective services to the Department's varied constituencies.
Our task for the future will be to build on these accomplishments while continuing to serve the millions of wage earners of our Nation.
Fiscal year 1984 marked the first year of ETA's administration of the new Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
This new legislation went into effect in October 1983 and replaced the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA).
JTPA builds on the experience of two decades of training and employment programs but makes a number of fundamental changes in the philosophy as well as the approaches to assisting the unemployed and economically disadvantaged.
JTPA is sharply focused on training, with a legislatively mandated requirement that at least 70 percent of all funds be used for this purpose.
JTPA establishes a public/private partnership between government and the private sector by providing a major role for business in the direction and operation of JTPA programs through the establishment of Private Industry Councils (PIC's) at the local level and through State Job Training Coordinating Councils (SJTCC) at the State level.
JTPA is a performance driven program, with clearly defined performance standards for measuring the effectiveness of programs and with provisions for sanctions as well as incentives to improve program performance.
JTPA shifts primary responsibility and authority for the design and administration of the delivery system, a role that had historically rested with the Federal Government, to the Governors and the States.
The initiation of the new program in October 1983 followed a transition year of intensive preparation at all levels of government.
At the State level, JTPA necessitated the building of a new administrative structure to carry out the many oversight responsibilities shifted from the Federal level including designating service delivery areas within each State, insuring the financial integrity of programs within their jurisdiction, providing reporting systems and technical assistance to local programs.
At the local level, the chief elected official(s) in each of the designated areas appointed members of the Private Industry Councils (PIC's).
These councils, led by members of the local business community, were to share, with local government, responsibility for planning and monitoring Service Delivery Areas (SDA) programs.
At the Federal level, the new structure under JTPA required a substantial restructuring and reorientation of the Employment and Training Administration to reflect the shift of responsibilities to the States and to carry out the new responsibilities assigned to the Secretary of Labor under JTPA.
The latter included, in addition to guiding the development of the overall JTPA system, establishing a system of performance standards, providing for an evaluation system to assess the new program, and putting in place the necessary fiscal and financial controls to assure the integrity of the new structure.
Title I provides for a system of block grants to States to support local training and employment programs for the economically disadvantaged.
States are responsible for further allocating the funds to service delivery areas in their States and for overseeing the planning and operation of local programs.
Part B of this title also provides for a summer youth employment and training program.
Title III of JTPA provides for a new program targeted on dislocated workers—experienced workers displaced from their regular employment by plant closings, technological change, foreign competition or other major economic disturbances.
Title IV provides for a limited number of activities to be continued under Federal direction.
Generally, these are programs that involve interstate activities or are special responsibilities of the Federal Government.
These include the Job Corps, Indian and Native American programs, Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker programs, and various support activities such as evaluation and technical assistance.
Among the major changes under JTPA is a shift to forward funding of training and employment programs.
To initiate this process the fiscal year 1984 appropriation provided funding for 21 months, with $2.9 billion to support a transition period (TP) of 9 months running from October 1, 1983 to June 30, 1984, and $3.6 billion to support the first full program year (PY) covering the period of July 1, 1984 through June 30, 1985.
Title IIA provides for a system of block grants to States based on relative unemployment and number of disadvantaged persons.
1 Data on total JTPA participants for the 9-month transition period are from the JTPA Annual Status Reports.
Data on characteristics for the transition period are from the Job Training Longitudinal Survey (JTLS).
200,000 population or as determined by the Governor.
In the transition period, there were 595 designated SDA's which received a total of $1.4 billion for the 9-month period to fund the basic training program under title IIA.
For program year 1984, $1.9 billion has been appropriated for the title IIA program.
In the basic title IIA programs, over 615,000 persons were served during the 9-month transition period.
Over 73 percent of the funds expended went to the support of training activities, exceeding the JTPA requirement that at least 70 percent of the funds be used for training with no more than 30 percent used for administration and support services.
The major types of services provided to participants in JTPA are classroom training, on-the-job training and job search assistance.
Through the three quarters of the transition period, over 60 percent of all participants were in classroom or on-the-job training with the remainder in job search assistance programs and other services.
Data from the transition period under the new program indicate that of new participants entering JTPA: 94 percent were economically disadvantaged (the statute requires that 90 percent of those served be economically disadvantaged); 46 percent were members of minority groups, and 41 percent were receiving public assistance.
Over 390,000 participants terminated from the basic program during the transition period.
Of this number, 64 percent entered employment with an average wage of $4.53 per hour.
Title III of JTPA authorized a new program to retrain experienced workers displaced from their regular jobs.
Over $94 million was authorized for the dislocated worker program for the transition period.
For the full 1984 program year, $223 million has been appropriated.
Seventy-five percent of the funds are allocated to the States for distribution by the Governors to address problems of dislocation within their States.
The remaining 25 percent is reserved for distribution by the Secretary to the States to address special problems and needs.
With certain exceptions, where unemployment exceeds the national average, States are required to match the Federal grant with non-Federal contributions.
Dislocated worker programs are designed to provide on-thejob training, classroom training, job placement, and other necessary support services to enable dislocated workers to find new jobs, primarily in the private sector.
Services may also be provided before lay-off when there is notice of a plant closing.
Total enrollments under title III through June 30, 1984 (the end of the transition period), numbered over 96,000.
Of over 50,000 participants that terminated from the program, 72 percent entered employment.
Data on the characteristics of the terminees indicate that 89 percent of the participants were unemployed at the time of enrollment and 45 percent were receiving unemployment compensation.
Title IIB provides for a Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP).
This program gives economically disadvantaged youth employment opportunities and related training and educational services during the summer months.
States and local service delivery areas received a total of $824.6 million for the summer of 1984 and provided over 740,000 summer jobs for disadvantaged youth.
The Job Corps, authorized by title IV, provides a wide range of training, education, and support services, primarily in residential centers, for disadvantaged youth ages 16 to 21.
During the transition period, the Job Corps operated 107 training centers at a cost of $460 million.
The program is being funded at $599 million for program year 1984.
These centers provided 30,500 service years and served approximately 42,000 new enrollees during the 9-month period.
During the period, ETA implemented formal performance standards for the Job Corps centers and established a reporting system to assess center performance against standards.
In addition, changes in vocational offerings were begun on a center-bycenter basis in accordance with the findings of the comprehensive vocational review conducted in the preceding fiscal year.
Other measures to enhance the effectiveness of the program included: initiation of a study to determine the feasibility of automated linkages between Job Corps centers, Regional Offices and the National Office; a major initiative focused on revising, updating and consolidating all Job Corps issuances; and a continuing effort to improve the cost-effectiveness of the program.
Under title IV of JTPA, ETA continued to have responsibility for administering several national programs serving groups that the legislation identified as in need of special services because of the particular disadvantages they encounter in the labor market.
Native American communities and various related organizations.
During the transition period, approximately 20,000 Indians and Native Americans were served at a cost of $47 million; program year 1984 funding is at the $62.2 million level.
In terms of services, 34 percent received classroom training, 9 percent received on-the-job training, 25 percent were in work experience or community service employment, 2 percent were in tryout employment and 30 percent received various supportive services.
The Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Program provides services to migrants and seasonal farmworkers, ranging from job training to emergency assistance, health and medical care, and nutritional services.
During the transition period the program served an estimated 30,200 persons at a cost of $43.5 million.
Program year 1984 funding is at the $65.5 million level.
Over 6,400 received classroom training, 4,400 were placed in on-the-job training and 1,400 were placed in work experience positions.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP), authorized by title V of the Older Americans Act, provides subsidized part-time jobs in community service activities for lowincome persons 55 or older.
Grants are given to States and national organizations to develop part-time jobs which typically are for an average of 20 hours per week and are located in such facilities as hospitals, senior citizens centers, schools, and other public institutions.
In fiscal 1984, the SCSEP provided employment for over 62,000 older persons through an appropriation of $317.3 million.
Among ETA's major responsibilities is the promotion and fostering of an effective national apprenticeship system.
This activity is carried out in cooperation with State Apprenticeship Agencies by providing technical assistance and advisory services to employers, employer associations and labor organizations.
During fiscal 1984, over 325,000 apprentices received training and almost 72,000 new apprentices entered training.
Female apprentices accounted for 7 percent of the total and 19 percent were members of minority groups.
For several years, ETA has made special efforts, in cooperation with the Defense Department, to develop and expand apprenticeship in the Armed Services.
In fiscal 1984, approximately 37,000 uniformed personnel were enrolled in apprenticeship programs conducted by the Army, Navy, and the Marine Corps.
The Defense Department also sponsors apprenticeship programs for its civilian employees.
During the year, there were 53,000 apprenticeship programs registered with ETA or the 31 State apprenticeship agencies, including 2,000 new programs developed during the year.
Ten new occupations were recognized as apprenticeable, bringing the total to 745.
During the period, Federal staff conducted 1,544 compliance reviews of apprenticeship programs to assure compliance with the provisions of equal employment opportunity in apprenticeship regulations.
Efforts to improve the quality and effectiveness of apprenticeship programs were continued during the year.
Almost 1,900 quality assessments were made during the year.
Based on the results of these assessments, apprenticeship field staff assisted program sponsors in implementing such quality improvements as performance based training, revised and updated work processes, and improved related instructions.
Title V of JTPA ameuded the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933, which established the United States Employment Service (USES) and a national system of State public employment service offices.
The Wagner-Peyser Act provides that States, through their legislature, designate the agency which will obtain the benefit of Wagner-Peyser appropriations and cooperate with the USES.
JTPA amendments strengthen the relationship between local public employment service activities and local training programs under JTPA and put the employment service on the same program year schedule as provided for the basic JTPA programs.
Basic ES funding is allocated among the States using a statutory formula based on each State's relative share of the labor force and the unemployed.
Provision is made for the involvement of local SDA's and Private Industry Councils in the planning of local ES programs.
Set-asides from the basic allocation are provided for the use of the Governor for performance incentives, providing for services to groups with special needs, and for costs of exemplary programs.
States are given considerable latitude in deciding the levels and mix of services to be provided with the basic Wagner-Peyser grants.
Activities of national interest, such as labor certification, occupational aptitude test development, and the affected workers.
An exception to this deadline is provided for older workers: an affected worker who was at least age 60 prior to October 1, 1984, has his entitlement continue until he reaches age 65.
Since its inception as of May 1977, $93.1 million has been paid to affected workers in weekly layoff benefits and severance payments.
For fiscal 1984, preliminary data indicate the affected workers were paid benefits for 23,821 weeks for a total of $6.1 million.
Severance payments totaling $1.4 million were made to 68 workers.
Relocation and job search allowances for 16 workers amounted to $25,855.
Under the Disaster Unemployment Assistance Program (DUA) during the fiscal year, 23 major disasters were declared in 19 States.
Some 23,190 individuals received DUA benefits during the 10-month period ending July 31, 1984.
Benefits totaled $15.0 million, up from $3.1 million in the same period of fiscal year 1983.
Under the Trade Act of 1974, ETA conducts fact finding investigations on worker petitions for trade adjustment assistance (TAA) benefits.
Trade-impacted workers certified as eligible to apply for TAA may receive additional weeks of unemployment benefits, training, counseling, job search and relocation payments.
The TAA provisions were extended through September 30, 1985, by the International Coffee Agreement Amendments Act of 1983.
The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 further amended the Trade Act, effective July 18, 1984, by increasing the maximum amount for job search and relocation allowances from $600 to $800, and by allowing for workers whose entry into training was delayed for administrative reasons to collect 26 additional weeks of trade readjustment allowances (TRA).
During fiscal 1984 the backlog of cases was reduced, resulting in determinations averaging less than 4 months.
At the end of fiscal 1984 the case backlog stood at 151—a reduction of 72 percent as compared to the previous fiscal year.
Four hundred and thirty-three (433) new worker TAA petitions were filed with the Department during fiscal 1984.
About 46,200 workers were certified as eligible to receive TAA benefits, with the majority of workers located in steel, footwear, and electronics industries, compared to about 155,000 workers mostly in the steel, automobile and apparel industries in the previous fiscal year.
TAA data for the first 9 months of fiscal 1984 show that 12,303 workers adversely affected by imports received TRA first payments.
A total of $28.86 million was paid in TRA benefits during the same period.
Efforts to expand and improve internal security in the UI programs continued to receive attention on the part of all SESA's.
In addition to the normal duties of preventing and detecting employee fraud, many SESA's continued to complete their risk analysis of UI operations.
Such analyses identify vulnerabilities in system performance and establish safeguards to eliminate or reduce threats to program operation.
New initiatives for fiscal 1985 will be focused on the future direction/policy for internal security, the need for SESA's staff training and revised reporting procedure which takes into account savings of funds resulting from setting up new controls as well as actual dollars involved from the internal fraud cases uncovered by SESA's internal security staff.
A major element in the comprehensive program for control of improper payment continues to be the Random Audit Program (RAP) which was expanded during the fiscal year and is now operating in 46 States.
RAP was designed to produce valid rates of detectable overpayments or improper payments on a statewide basis and serve as a management tool to identify problems and foster corrective action.
Random Audit will be replaced by an expanded UI Quality Control (QC) program in fiscal 1985.
Under this more comprehensive approach, a QC system will be phased in over a 3-year period.
The initial design and policy decisions were completed and preliminary activities for implementation in fiscal 1985 have been initiated.
The QC system builds on experience gained under Random Audit and studies related to needed improvements in the UI revenue function.
Once implemented, QC will also form the basis for other program improvements including the elimination of overlapping functions, streamlining of administrative requirements and increased emphasis on the quality of program operations.
In the early months of the fiscal year, continuing high levels of benefit payments coupled with the normal seasonal decline in tax collections resulting from cutoff in taxable wages as the tax year ends, resulted in continued heavy State borrowing from the Federal Unemployment Account (loan fund).
As of January 31, 1984, loan indebtedness of 26 States reached a total of $14 billion—the highest aggregate total of unpaid loans to date.
Since that time, as the economy has improved and revisions in State financing have begun to take hold, the need for additional loans has diminished and substantial repayments have been made by some States.
As of September 18, 1984, the aggregate total indebtedness of 21 States had dropped to $9.6 billion, a reduction of 31.4 percent in a period of less than 8 months.
Under the Redwood Employee Protection Program, the end of fiscal 1984 marked the ending of weekly layoff payments to ment Security Agencies (SESA's), a substantial reduction from the 30.3 million filed in 1982.
Weeks of unemployment claimed included 145 million weeks of total unemployment and 339 million weeks of partial unemployment.
A total of $18.7 billion was paid to 8.9 million claimants.
Major legislation affecting the UI system enacted during the year included: The Federal Supplemental Compensation Amendments of 1983 which extended the Federal Supplemental Compensation (FSC) program to March 31, 1985; amendments to title III and title XI of the Social Security Act, (the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984) which required that each State establish an income and eligibility verification system for the exchange of eligibility information among federally assisted entitlement programs including Unemployment Insurance (UI).
Requirements for the system include the establishment of a system of quarterly wage reports from employers or approval by the Secretary of an alternative system, by no later than September 30, 1988.
The Act also included provisions to broaden the UI tax base by including tips under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act.
In response to a congressional mandate contained in the Federal Supplemental Compensation Amendments of 1983, the Department submitted two reports to the Congress in early 1984 on the feasibility of substate area triggers in unemployment compensation and on the feasibility of determining whether claimants are structurally unemployed.
1. Use of any proposed area triggers would be inconsistent with present concepts and administrative capabilities of the UI system.
2. There are no present data indicating whether individuals are structurally unemployed that are available on other than a retroactive basis, after the period of unemployment has expired.
Ensuring the integrity of the UI program continues to receive high priority by SESA's under the Administration's efforts for the reduction of fraud, waste, and abuse in such programs.
In an effort to increase the cost-effectiveness of systems used by SESA's to detect and recover benefit overpayments, additional funds have been made available to SESA's by ETA to help cover the implementation costs of the model crossmatch and recovery systems.
During fiscal 1984, these allocations included: $350,000 for model crossmatch in eight States; and $911,000 for model recovery systems in 19 States.
Data for the first two quarters of fiscal 1984 indicate that the numbers and amounts of overpayments detected will reach all-time highs for a 12-month period.
The amount of overpayments recovered should also represent new highs.
As a result, weekly listings of job orders increased from 2,700 to over 4,000 in fiscal 1984.
Pilot applications of telecommumications techniques and development of an automated referral and placement tracking process were initiated during the year.
In fiscal 1984, a significant breakthrough was achieved in the field of occupational aptitude testing and test development.
A new method, piloted in one State, and initiated in others, has demonstrated that unique interpretation methods for General Aptitude Testing can identify the most able applicants for virtually all jobs.
The Work Incentive (WIN) Program provides training and employment services to applicants/recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC).
WIN is administered jointly by the Department of Labor and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
However, under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, States were given the option of conducting a demonstration program under which the WIN program could be administered by solely State welfare agencies under the direction of HHS.
Some 20 States have elected to operate WIN demonstration programs.
Participants in WIN are from groups that experience particular disadvantages in the labor market.
In the first three quarters of fiscal 1984, 71 percent of WIN participants were women; over half were minorities; and over half had less than a high school education.
During the first three quarters of the fiscal year, regular WIN programs in the 34 States remaining under joint DOL/HHS administration registered nearly 434,000 persons and assisted more than 123,000 registrants to enter unsubsidized employment.
Of those placed in jobs, 55 percent earned enough at entry to leave the AFDC rolls; the remainder continued to receive assistance but at a reduced level.
For the 34 States under the joint program, the reduction in welfare grants as a result of the WIN program is estimated at $252.1 million for the 9-month period.
This estimate does not include savings from reductions in food stamps or medicaid.
Targeted Job Tax Credit program are funded through contracts or reimbursable agreements.
During the first three quarters of fiscal 1984, almost 8.5 million persons submitted full job applications at the State-operated public employment service offices, and 5.2 million job openings were listed by employers.
Of the jobs listed, 3.7 million (or 71 percent) were filled.
During the year, work was undertaken on updating the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT), a basic reference for many employers, schools, and other personnel-related activities.
Four additional Occupational Analysis Field Centers were established to supplement the North Carolina Field Center.
Selection of staff for the new centers was completed and training in basic procedures for the collection of occupational information was begun.
Initial emphasis is on occupations in high technology industries and on occupations impacted by technological change.
The employment service continued to have special responsibilities for administering the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) Program.
TJTC is an elective income tax credit that can be applied to the wages private employers pay to new employees in certain target groups.
Employers hiring a member of the specified groups must obtain certification from a public employment service office in order to qualify for the credit.
During the first three quarters of fiscal 1984, public employment service offices issued 396,000 certifications, an increase of 46 percent over the same period in fiscal 1983.
The program, originally scheduled to expire at the end of 1984, has been extended through December 1985, by the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984.
The U.S. Employment Service and its affiliated State agencies administer a labor certification program required by the Immigration and Nationality Act.
In fiscal 1984, approximately 31,000 applications for permanent and temporary labor certifications were processed with 25,000 applications certified for approval.
In calendar 1983, approximately 19,500 applications for jobs in temporary agricultural work, to be filled by foreign workers, were certified.
The Employers' National Job Service Committee (ENJSC) and more than 1,600 affiliated Job Service Employer Committees (JSEC) provided private sector leadership to assist the public employment service in establishing the new relationships authorized by JTPA.
Over 20,000 employers participate in this volunteer program to improve services to employers and applicants by the State public employment service agencies.
Additional improvements were made to the Interstate Job Bank, building on efforts begun in fiscal 1983.
1,782 workers received $1.8 million in job relocation allowances.
Over $13.4 million was provided for training programs during the 9-month period.
Under a separate provision of the Trade Act of 1974, industries may petition the U.S. International Trade Commission for import relief.
When this occurs, the Secretary of Labor conducts a study and reports his findings to the President within 15 days after the Commission makes its report.
The Secretary's report addresses the number of workers in the domestic industry producing the like or directly competitive article who have been or are likely to be certified as eligible for TAA, and the extent to which the adjustment of such workers to import competition may be facilitated through the use of existing Department programs.
Such reports and the accompanying studies are known as “escape clause"investigations.
During fiscal 1984 the Department completed studies on the ferrosilicone, stainless steel flatware, footwear, tuna fish, copper and steel industries.
In fiscal 1984, ETA continued the implementation of the electronic transfer of funds to grantees using the "Letter of Credit-Treasury Financial Communications System" (LOC-TFCS).
All State Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) program funds and State Employment Security Agency program funds were disbursed to the States electronically using LOC-TFCS.
In addition, approximately 75 percent of the Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker programs, 95 percent of the Older Worker programs and 85 percent of the Native American programs receive funding through LOC-TFCS.
Because of LOC-TFCS implementation, the average time between drawdowns from JTPA programs was reduced from 17.8 days in fiscal 1983 to 5.6 days in fiscal 1984.
This resulted in a savings in interest payments of $10.7 million.
All ETA grantees with over $25,000 in grant funding per month are expected to receive funding through LOC-TFCS by the end of the first quarter of fiscal 1985.
With the electronic fund transfer system in place, the problem of excess cash drawdowns by grantees was significantly reduced.
In fiscal 1984, ETA continued refinement of its automated cash flow management review system.
Through September 30, 1984, over $73.1 million dollars had been returned to the Department of the Treasury as a result of ETA's cash flow management review system and subsequent followup.
Seventeen million dollars in debt collection cash was returned and over $56 million in cash management/closeout management cash was returned to the Treasury.
In addition to the above, ETA developed and initiated an on-site cash management compliance review process.
Instructions were developed and provided to State agencies administering JTPA to illustrate the type of on-site cash management compliance monitoring review that would take place and the degree that the same process could be used at the local SDA level.
During fiscal ·1984, 91 of 114 State Employment Security Agencies and JTPA State sponsors were monitored to insure that they had implemented satisfactory cash management practices.
The average amount of excess cash found in JTPA programs averaged $182,252 per day with an average of 2.0 days of excess cash holding.
Similar reviews of State Employment Security Agencies indicated an average amount of excess cash on hand per agency to be $341,548 and the average number of days of excess cash per SESA to be 2.3.
Both findings are well within the Department of the Treasury guidance of no more than 3 days of excess cash.
In fiscal 1984, space reduction savings totaled $529,000, telecommunications savings totaled $542,000 and some $423,000 in savings was realized through realignment of the grade structure in ETA.
During fiscal 1984, a comprehensive review of mandated ETA reporting on the part of grantees was made in conjunction with the preparation of the ETA Information Collection Budget (ICB).
As a result, ETA established, with the concurrence of OMB, a goal of reducing the number of burden hours involved in reporting by 4 percent or 133,868 burden hours.
The actual burden hour reduction for fiscal 1984 was 595,645 or more than double the goal and resulted in savings of almost $3 million dollars to grantees.
A basic objective of ETA is the resolution of all outstanding audits and the elimination of backlogged contract/grant closeout activity.
During fiscal 1984 this objective focused on the accomplishment of the phasedown and closeout of the CETA program.
Approximately 650 audits directly related to the CETA phasedown and closeout effort were resolved in fiscal 1984.
With respect to closeout activities, more than 1,400 CETA Prime Sponsor Annual Plan subparts were settled and more than 200 Prime Sponsor Master Plans were terminated.
At the end of the fiscal year, 811 other contracts or grants were pending closeout.
These contracts or grants could not be closed for reasons such as pending debt collection actions, appeals of contract/grant officer determinations, unresolved audit issues, and the pending establishment of indirect cost rates.
During the fiscal year ETA collected approximately $21 million of the debt established through the audit resolution process.
More than $17 million of this amount were cash collections.
Also, more than $8 million of debt was referred to the Department of Justice and the General Accounting Office for litigation or termination.
All ETA programs and functions were assessed in fiscal 1984 to determine their vulnerability to waste, fraud and abuse in accordance with the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act of 1982.
Twenty-one internal control reviews and surveys of ETA activities and functions were conducted.
Over 500 preaward reviews were completed on potential ETA contractors or grantees.
In addition, investigations were conducted to determine the validity of allegations received through the ETA Incident Report system and the GAO and OIG Hotline systems.
Appropriate corrective action was instituted where warranted.
In fiscal 1984, ETA's policy and planning activities concentrated on the Federal Government's responsibility to provide broad policy guidance for activities conducted under the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) as well as the Federal Government's responsibilities for oversight of the new employment and training legislation.
At the start of the fiscal year the emphasis was on policy questions that arose with JTPA's actual operational startup in October 1983.
Briefing sessions were held for business, government and civic leaders to clarify policies and to discuss issues of common concern.
Position papers were designed.
Guidance was prepared to help the various JTPA "partners"carry out their new responsibilities.
In addition, the required JTPA regulatory process was completed: proposed regulations were screened for consistency with the law's principles and published in time to meet legislated timeframes.
With the JTPA operational phase well under way, attention centered on the Federal Government's oversight role, a major responsibility under JTPA.
Early implementation studies and surveys of JTPA operations were analyzed to determine progress in meeting the mandates and expectations for the new legislation.
Results were shared with the public in publications distributed through regular public information channels as well as with the Cabinet at special meetings of the President's Cabinet Council and with the Congress.
In addition to carrying out congressional-related JTPA responsibilities, ETA continued to provide weekly updates for DOL managers on congressional activities.
ETA participated in congressional oversight hearings on the JTPA implementation, the Job Corps and title V of the Older Americans Act and developed the Department's position on such legislative proposals as the Unemployment Insurance (UI) and the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program in the Tax Reform/Deficit Reduction Act (PL 98-369) and amendments to trade adjustment assistance provisions in the Trade Act.
A major review was completed of the National Plan of Action related to responsibilities of the Human Resources Working Group, chaired by ETA, under the Nation's Emergency Mobilization Preparedness Program.
The annual Employment and Training Report of the Secretary (ETROS) was submitted to Congress as required by JTPA.
An operational planning system for developing and tracking ETA's goals and objectives was developed and implemented.
The issuance of an initial system of performance standards and the carrying out of surveys to assess early JTPA implementation and impact were important fiscal 1984 activities.
ETA developed and issued performance standards for titles IIA and III, as well as Job Corps, Indian and Farmworker programs, and the Employment Service.
Each of these sets of standards was developed through an advisory committee process which provided for the input and advice of the user community and experts who could support this development effort.
ETA also provided training and assistance in the implementation of the standards through the issuance of technical assistance guides and the provision of specific training sessions for State and local staff, with principal focus on title IIA.
The development and issuance of seven standards for program year 1984.
These included four adult and three youth standards.
The development and issuance of the Secretary's parameters within which Governors may adjust the seven national standards based on such local conditions as economic factors.
The development and issuance of an optional methodology to assist Governors in adjusting local standards.
During the fiscal year additional work was undertaken to refine initial standards and to develop the remaining sets of standards required by the law, in particular prospective welfare reduction and postprogram standards for title IA.
Findings from early implementation and impact surveys formed the basis for the briefings and reports that ETA prepared in accordance with the DOL's oversight responsibility.
In general, the early data from a 2-year process study on JTPA implementation indicated that JTPA was being implemented according to the principles of the legislated framework.
Early data from the Job Training Longitudinal Survey (JTLS), the major instrument for measuring JTPA's impact, showed that JTPA was serving the intended clientele (94 percent disadvantaged) with the intended service (73 percent of expenditures for training).
In fiscal 1984 ETA also funded an 18-month study to evaluate the implementation and effects of the JTPA provisions that amended Wagner-Peyser Act.
The study will assess the effect of the amendments on the ES at the State and local levels, exploring particularly changes in ES resources, services, clients and relationships with other employment and training institutions and delivery systems.
In fiscal 1984, ETA directed its major research efforts to the requirements of new responsibilities under the JTPA, particularly the need to carry on research that would aid in the development and assessment of performance standards and address JTPA operational problems and issues.
At the same time, ETA adhered to its long standing commitment to research basic labor market issues.
ETA continued, for instance, to track the working life of various demographic groups through the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS), a survey begun in 1966.
In addition, nationally administered pilot, demonstration, and multi-State programs provided training and other employmentrelated services to special-needs groups, such as the handicapped, youth, and persons of limited English-speaking ability.
JTPA provides for concurrent oversight activities initiated by local, State, and Federal entities in the job training system.
The exercise of oversight responsibilities at the local, State, and Federal levels assesses how the system is performing and the extent to which it complies with the statutory requirements (i.e., compliance reviews).
The major emphasis of ETA oversight is to review the development and effectiveness of State systems to plan, manage, direct and assess programs within the State.
A sample of SDA's are also reviewed to determine whether State systems are functioning as intended.
ETA's oversight strategy includes special studies and impact evaluations mandated by sec. 454 of JTPA as well as analysis of a limited number of reported items from the States.
Surveys will be conducted as needed.
The ETA regional offices have primary responsibility for conducting JTPA onsite compliance reviews in States.
JTPA oversight actually began while States were gearing up for operation, prior to the October 1, 1984, start date for the main JTPA program.
ETA joined OIG teams doing preaward surveys in July-August 1983.
Findings, including a "critical States alert,' were sent to the Secretary and ETA in September 1983.
Followup activities commenced, with ETA regions tracking improvements and arranging for technical assistance where needed.
In fiscal 1984, ETA put into place a comprehensive oversight system.
Of the 19 compliance review guides that are used in the oversight process, 16 were completed and issued during fiscal 1984.
Application of the compliance review guides began during January-March 1984 in all 10 ÉTA regions with the title III Discretionary Program.
Priority was also given to reviews in three other areas: Cash Management, Summer Youth Employment and Training Program, and Wagner-Peyser Cost Reimbursable Grants.
An automated compliance review scheduling system was developed and implemented during the fiscal year as part of the oversight system, to facilitate coordination of the onsite reviews at State and local levels.
A second automated system was designed and implemented to track the preparation, review, and transmittal of the compliance review reports to the ETA Grant Officer and the States.
During the last quarter of fiscal 1984, 390 onsite compliance reviews were completed.
The Bureau celebrated its centennial with a variety of activities, including an all-employees ceremony on June 27, 1984, the anniversary of the signing of the enabling legislation by President Chester A. Arthur 100 years earlier.
This law, which directed the Bureau to collect information upon the subject of labor, its relation to capital, the hours of labor, and the earnings of laboring men and women, and the means of promoting their material, social, intellectual, and moral prosperity,"still provides the principal legislative foundation for the Bureau's programs.
Chaired by the Bureau's tenth Commissioner, Janet L. Norwood, the all-employees celebration included speeches by Secretary of Labor Raymond J. Donovan, Markley Roberts and Warren Bacon—chairs of the Bureau's Labor Research Advisory Council and Business Research Advisory Council, respectively—and Stephen Fienberg, chairman of the Committee on Statistics of the National Academy of Sciences.
About 1,000 persons attended, including employees, former employees, leaders in the Federal statistical community and the Executive Branch of the Government, and other friends of the Bureau.
Regional office ceremonies included a videotape on the history of the Bureau with comments by some of today's major users of Bureau data.
Congress passed and the President signed a joint resolution giving special recognition and commendation to the Bureau for its century of exemplary service.
The Joint Economic Committee of Congress is joining the Bureau in sponsoring a reception to be held in late January 1985 to mark the anniversary of the swearing in of the first Commissioner, Carroll D. Wright.
Three major professional associations, the American Statistical Association, the American Economic Association, and the Industrial Relations Research Association, sponsored special programs at their annual meetings, in observance of the BLS Centennial.
To take further note of its centennial year, the Bureau published a bulletin, Our Changing Economy: A BLS Centennial Chartbook, which traces the changes in the long series of BLS economic indicators.
This chartbook provides a graphic picture of the evolution of many aspects of the American economy during the past century.
A history of the Bureau will be published early next year.
Program activities in fiscal year 1984 continued to emphasize improvements in the quality of the macroeconomic series.
Bureau initiated a major revision of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to reflect new population data from the 1980 Decennial Census of Population and new data on consumer expenditures for goods and services from the continuing consumer expenditure survey.
The multiyear schedule calls for publication of the revised CPI beginning with data for January 1987.
Publication will include the two national indexes—the CPI for All Urban Consumers and for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers—as well as monthly indexes for 4 metropolitan areas, bimonthly indexes for 11 metropolitan areas, and semiannual average indexes for 12 metropolitan areas.
In 64 other urban areas where data are to be collected, sample representation will be insufficient for publication of local indexes.
Work continued throughout the year on three other major multiyear revisions initiated in earlier years: The redesign of the sample for the Current Population Survey, revision of the Producer Price Index, and the modernization of the current employment statistics programs.
Although no new program initiatives were requested of Congress in the fiscal year 1984 budget request, Congress included two in its 1984 Appropriations Reports for the Department of Labor.
Congress directed the Bureau (1) to begin work to expand the data for the services sector of the economy and (2) to develop an annual report on permanent layoffs and plant closings, such as those that had occurred recently in the auto and steel industries.
Congressional interest in the service sector related to a governmentwide effort to expand data for this sector, which today accounts for 70 percent of total employment, two-thirds of the GNP, and 40 percent of total exports.
The proposed mass layoff report reflected concern about the impact of layoffs on the workers involved.
The Bureau developed plans and related cost estimates to identify the major layoffs and closures, the characteristics of the affected plants and workers, and the continuing impact of the permanent layoff or plant closing on individuals whose unemployment benefits have run out.
However, the Bureau had to divert the fiscal year 1984 resources for the service sector initiative to cover increased salary costs for the Bureau's staff, a higher priority requirement.
Congress included these funds again, in the fiscal year 1984 Pay Supplemental to the Departments of Labor and Health and Human Services Appropriation Act, and earmarked them especially for the service sector expansion with instructions that "The Bureau. . .is directed to report to the Committee by December 1, 1984, its plan for carrying out expanded service sector collection activities, including a timetable and specific cost estimates of additional resources necessary for effective implementation."
The President's Cabinet Council on Management and Administration (CCMA) established an interagency task force to advise the Council on how to improve the Federal pay comparability process.
The task force recommended—and the President's Pay Agent endorsed—improvements in the present process, or more specifically, a strengthening of the Bureau's National Survey of Professional, Administrative, Technical, and Clerical pay (PATC) (a survey of white-collar occupations) by adding smaller establishments and State and local governments, as well as broadening the scope of private industry coverage by including more service industries.
The CCMA will consider this report shortly.
To be ready, the Bureau developed plans to implement these recommendations, as resources become available.
BLS assumed, for the first time, both funding and managerial responsibilities for State operations for the occupational employment statistics, current employment statistics, and local area unemployment statistics programs.
In addition to maintaining its long-held technical authority for these Federal/State cooperative programs, the Bureau took over the management of ongoing data collection and compilation activities and made plans for a longrange effort to improve the efficiency and consistency of State operations, including data processing activities.
This year, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) transferred $5.3 million to BLS to cover all State operations on the occupational employment statistics program.
The ETA also earmarked resources from its own budget for BLS to cover State operations in the current employment statistics and local area unemployment statistics programs.
BLS management of all aspects of these programs reflected a departmental decision to centralize authority for all labor market information (LMI) statistical programs in BLS to avoid the inefficiencies associated with divided management.
Transfer of another $20 million from the State Unemployment Insurance and Employment Service Operations Account, a trust fund, is planned for next year to complete the consolidation of the management within BLS of the three LMI programs.
The Bureau continued to strengthen and expand the program of measurement and analysis of productivity in response to public interest in this key topic.
The multifactor productivity measures introduced in 1983 for many sectors of the economy were further refined and extended, and research on factors affecting these measures, such as research and development expenditures, was accelerated.
In addition, preliminary multifactor measures for steel and autos were completed.
The Bureau also provided assistance to the Office of Management and Budget this year in its effort to evaluate Government agency productivity performance using BLS productivity measures for Federal agencies.
Definitions.
BLS Report 412-3, What Every Employer Needs To Know About OSHA Recordkeeping, provides interpretive guidance to employers on how to comply with their responsibilities to record occupational injuries and illnesses on the OSHA log and summary forms.
During the year, OMB determined that the BLS revised guidelines for recording occupational injuries and illnesses were, in effect, instructions for completing the OSHA recordkeeping forms and, as such, required OMB approval under the Paperwork Reduction Act.
OMB published a notice of the proposed revisions to the guidelines in the Federal Register on July 20.
Since time precluded appropriate evaluation of the extensive comments within the current survey cycle, OMB approved, instead, the continued use through 1985 of the guidelines as set forth in BLS Report 412-3, and assigned it an OMB approval number.
Quality of the annual survey.
The Commissioner, testifying before the Manpower and Housing Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations, stressed the need for a quality management program for the annual survey data.
In subsequent action, the Committee of Conference directed the Department of Labor to allocate $500,000 to the Bureau for this purpose in fiscal 1985.
Six of the Bureau's publications, including the Monthly Labor Review and the Occupational Outlook Quarterly, received top prizes in competitions sponsored by the Society for Technical Communication and the National Association of Government Communicators.
Under a new pricing formula, which BLS helped work out, the Government Printing Office began reducing prices of most BLS periodicals and other publications.
The Bureau began publication of monthly employment estimates for 82 additional industries in the service-producing sector.
Current Employment Statistics survey was made possible as a result of an increase in the sample of business firms reporting in the survey.
This expansion in industry detail was in accord with a recommendation by the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics.
BLS work continued on the implementation of a redesigned Current Population Survey (CPS) in coordination with the Bureau of the Census and a consortium of Federal agencies.
Mid-1985 is the target date for introduction of a new sample incorporating information from the 1980 Census of Population.
The Bureau continued to meet the labor force data needs of the press, business, academia, Congress, and government agencies.
Analyses issued included the regular, monthly summaries of employment and unemployment, as well as the semiannual and annual reporting, plus quarterly reports on weekly earnings, women in the labor force, and minorities.
Special analytical projects resulted in 19 Monthly Labor Review articles on a variety of labor market issues.
The Bureau published its third annual report examining the impact of employment problems on the economic wellbeing of families as required by the Job Training Partnership Act.
The Bureau completed the first year of cooperative agreements for labor market information statistical programs with 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
The process, involving contracts for the three programs for which BLS now has technical, funding, and managerial responsibility served to enhance the quality of the data, to preserve the funding base, and to lead to cost-effective management.
The Bureau continued test and development activities to modernize the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings.
Projects are under way to determine the appropriate estimating cell structure to be used by cooperative State agencies, and to test the feasibility of collecting new types of data, such as hours and earnings of all employees.
These studies should provide important information for long-term evaluation of alternative sample designs and data collection techniques.
Also, tests continued for the application of new survey techniques toward the goals of improving data quality and timeliness in BLS Federal/State cooperative programs.
Other efforts were the development of a microcoinputer environment for the local area unemployment statistics program and of a computer-assisted telephone collection program for the business survey.
The Bureau developed industry-occupational employment estimates for nonmanufacturing industries, based on data collected through the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) survey.
A redesigned occupational structure for the OES program, based on the Federal Standard Occupational Classification system, was used in developing survey questionnaires for the 1984 OES survey of mining, construction, finance, and selected service industries.
Objectives of the employment and wage program (ES-202) continued to focus on improving the quality and efficiency of the operations of cooperating State agencies.
All cooperating agencies are now reporting 4-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) data at the county level.
Timeliness has also improved, as 46 States are reporting on time.
The design and testing of the new county level macroedit were completed, and a new data base to support the system was developed.
The 1982 Employment and Wages bulletin was issued featuring photocomposition of tables for the first time.
News releases containing annual average pay for Metropolitan Statistical Areas and by State and industry for 1982 and 1983 were also issued.
The Employment and Training Administration used ES-202 data in their determination of minimum pay for alien farm workers; for setting performance standards under the Job Training Partnership Act; and in job placement centers.
The Health Care Financing Administration of the Department of Health and Human Services, using ES-202 data for area wage indexes, expanded coverage of their reimbursable programs under medicare to include several other health industries in addition to hospitals.
The universe maintenance operations program provided assistance to the States for the addition of employer identification numbers to their 1984 unemployment insurance (UI) name and address files.
Specifications for editing the 1984 UI name and address files were developed and will be used in creation of the 1984 BLS universe file.
A reference manual for SIC coding, SIC Coding Interpretations, was compiled and issued to the States and BLS staff.
In preparation for the 1987 SIC revision, research was conducted on proposed changes to the SIC coding structure, and comments were forwarded to the Office of Management and Budget for technical review.
During 1984, revision of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) began on a schedule which will lead to publication of a revised index for January 1987.
Major elements in this revision process will include: (1) Selection of new geographic samples to reflect changes in the distribution of the population as well as a new sample of items to be priced; (2) modernization of the computer system used for processing CPI data; (3) establishment of an improved program of quality control and measurement; and (4) improvement in the measures of price change for the shelter costs component of new housing.
Within the CPI itself, the program to update the CPI outlet sample in one-fifth of the CPI pricing areas went forward as scheduled.
The revision of the Producer Price Index (PPIR) continued; publication of revised indexes, utilizing scientific sampling and improved data collection techniques, expanded to approximately 315 industries in fiscal 1984.
The expansion phase of the PPIR is scheduled for completion in January 1986.
In the international price program in fiscal 1984, publication of indexes for exports was expanded to 100 percent of the value of products exported from the United States, and publication of price indexes for products imported continued at the 100-percent level.
The development of the computer system for Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES) data continued and will lead to an extensive publication program of consumer expenditure data in 1985 for the years 1980 through 1983.
More than 1 million copies of printed materials were distributed in response to more than 400,000 recorded requests for data and other information.
These figures exclude an extremely heavy correspondence and analytical workload in response to written and telephone requests from the Congress, policymaking agencies in the Executive Branch, private business, labor, and the general public.
The Employment Cost Index (ECI) is now released in the month that follows the reference month, because the processing cycle was shortened by several days.
The quality of ECI data was enhanced through a sample replacement effort that substantially strengthened the ECI in finance, insurance, and real estate; transportation and public utilities; and retail trade.
Also, work began to introduce new ECI employment weights and estimates of variance in numerous index measures.
Further improvements in ECI timeliness are anticipated as a result of preliminary work on an improved data entry system that will increase regional office productivity.
An article analyzing movements in purchasing power over the past 8 years, using data from the ECI and the Consumer Price Index, was published in the May 1984 Monthly Labor Review.
The annual Survey of Professional, Administrative, Technical, and Clerical Pay (PATC) was delivered on schedule for use in the Federal pay comparability process.
In addition, many special tabulations were prepared for research purposes at the request of the Office of Personnel Management and an interagency work group established to advise the Cabinet Council on Management and the Administration on how to improve the pay comparability process.
The work group recommended that the PATC survey be expanded to small establishments, to service industries not now studied, and to State and local governments.
The annual Employee Benefit Survey (EBS) of paid leave and employee benefit plans in medium and large firms was conducted with expanded statistical tabulations that distribute plan participants according to detailed provisions.
The EBS survey, done in conjunction with the PATC survey, provides a unique source of comprehensive data on detailed characteristics of employee benefit plans—leave, pensions, and a variety of insurances—in private industry.
The EBS bulletin included analysis of trends back to the first survey in 1979.
This program produced three Monthly Labor Review articles based on the pension plan data—an analysis of surviving spouse benefits in private pension plans, a study of the effect of Social Security payments on private pensions, and a report on postretirement pension increases.
Area wage surveys in 70 metropolitan areas were conducted under the regular program of occupational wage surveys.
In 19 of the areas studied, information was collected for the first time on the incidence of formal provisions for supplementary unemployment benefits; severance pay; cost-of-living adjustment; and paid leave for personal reasons, jury duty, funerals, and military duty.
In addition, new job descriptions for the occupations of word processor and material handling laborer were introduced.
Under contract to the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), 95 area wage surveys and 42 special industry wage surveys were conducted for use in administering the Service Contract Act.
In nine of the areas, data were obtained on wages in government as well as in private industry.
In the territory of Guam, two surveys were conducted, a cross-industry survey including government and a survey of the construction industry.
Both surveys included establishments employing 20 workers or more.
The feasibility of using intermittent employees to collect wage data by telephone was tested in three areas.
Also, data collection for a test survey of construction wages and employee benefits conducted for ESA was completed.
Seven industry wage surveys were conducted this year—down from about 12 to 15 conducted annually prior to the fiscal year 1982 budget cut.
Work on measuring variances of the industry wage survey estimates continued throughout the year.
Many formulas were tested, and programming has begun on the one selected as most appropriate.
Data collection for the banking industry wage survey will be coordinated with area wage surveys during calendar year 1985 in an effort to conserve resources in both data collection and review, as well as to reduce respondent burden.
If the project is successful, additional industry surveys may be coordinated in the future with the area program.
The Bureau compiled umiverses and selected samples for approximately 170 occupational wage surveys for the Federal Wage System (FWS) in 1984.
Work on a sample selection procedure that will maintain continuity from one year's survey to the next was completed.
This procedure became operational in June 1984.
Data on the size of wage and compensation adjustments agreed to in major collective bargaining contract settlements in private industry, a principal economic indicator, were published each quarter.
Data on the size of settlements in State and local governments were published semiannually.
Private industry data are for contracts covering 1,000 workers or more, but government data are limited to contracts covering 5,000 or more.
During the year, however, a project to expand the scope of the government series to parallel that of the private industry series was initiated and nearly completed.
The 1984 Bargaining Calendar was published, providing data on major contracts scheduled to expire or subject to reopening during the year.
An analysis of 1984 bargaining activity, including an expiration of key bargaining situations, was published in the January 1984 Monthly Labor Review.
The article also provided data on wage changes scheduled from earlier bargaining and costof-living reviews.
Each month, highlights of key negotiations and other developments in labor-management relations were published in Current Wage Developments.
This periodical also provided the details of wage and benefit changes in individual major bargaining situations and selected nonunion situations.
It also carried monthly statistics on major work stoppages, expiring agreements, and extensive data on changes in employee compensation.
The BLS further strengthened and expanded the program of measurement and analysis of productivity and technology—topics of substantial public interest.
Productivity measures are widely regarded as a major indicator of U.S. economic progress, and the Bureau refined and extended the series of published measures to provide broader coverage.
The multifactor productivity measures, published for major sectors of the economy, advance a major BLS effort to expand official productivity measures to take account of the role of capital inputs in changes in U.S. labor productivity.
First introduced in fiscal year 1983, considerable effort has been made over the past year to further refine and extend these key measures.
To further this effort, studies are under way to assess factors that affect multifactor measures, including impact of research and development expenditures, changes in labor force composition, changes in capacity utilization, changes in factor prices and depreciation schedules, and the recently completed survey comparing hours worked to hours paid.
In addition, multifactor measures are being developed for major industries, with measures for steel and autos completed.
The number of industries for which BLS publishes labor productivity measures also expanded.
The Bureau introduced new productivity measures for the meatpacking industry; retail apparel stores, including separate measures for men's and boys'clothing stores, women's ready-to-wear stores, family clothing stores, and shoe stores; and the switchgear industry.
A total of 129 separate productivity measures are now issued for industries in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
The Bureau also made progress in measuring productivity in the government sector.
The productivity measures for the Federal Government were updated to cover fiscal year 1982.
These measures currently cover fiscal years 1967 to 1982 for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies, representing 62 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
In addition, a bulletin on measuring productivity in State and local government activities was published.
In the international area, the Bureau updated trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 11 countries, added a twelfth country to the series, and initiated research toward the development of multifactor productivity measures for several countries.
The staff also updated the measures of comparative levels of hourly compensation costs for production workers in 34 countries and 36 manufacturing industries, and the series on the international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in 10 industrial countries.
These measures provided insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
In response to substantial public interest, the Bureau continued to assess the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years were prepared for four additional major American industries—hosiery, folding paper board boxes, metal cans, and laundry and cleaning.
During fiscal year 1984, labor force, economic, and industry and occupational employment projections to 1995 were published.
The 1984-85 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook and the 1984 edition of Occupational Projections and Training Data were also published.
National industry-occupation matrices for 1982 and 1995 were made available to the public.
An analysis of past and projected employment trends in high technology industries was also published.
In addition, an evaluation of BLS's projections of 1980 industry employment was prepared and published.
Several special analyses were completed during fiscal 1984, and published in the Occupational Outlook Quarterly.
These included an analysis of apprenticeship opportunities that discussed the qualifications generally required for entry into an apprenticeship program, and how individuals can apply for an apprenticeship; the job outlook for college graduates through the mid-1990's; the career patterns of June 1980 college graduates in May 1981; and career opportunities in the rapidly growing health technology fields.
The BLS occupational safety and health statistical program includes the Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses and recordkeeping, the Supplementary Data System (SDS), and the Work Injury Report (WIR) surveys.
Program activities are conducted through Federal-State cooperation.
Annual Survey.
In November 1983, BLS issued a news release on national estimates of incidence rates and numbers of occupational injuries and illnesses by industry for calendar year 1982.
More detailed statistics by industry and size of establishment were published in a bulletin in April 1984.
Industry guides for construction, manufacturing, transportation and public utilities, trade, and services were also updated and published.
These guides are intended primarily for use by employers.
Occupational fatality estimates and causal characteristics appeared in an article in the March 1984 Monthly Labor Review.
Individual State estimates for 1982 were produced by 39 States.
In February 1984, about 280,000 employers nationwide were mailed survey forms to provide their 1983 data.
Annual survey data have multiple uses, such as trend analysis, interindustry comparisons, inspection scheduling and targeting by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and public awareness of workplace safety and health.
Supplementary Data System (SDS).
İn fiscal year 1984, 32 States participated in the SDS, which provides detailed data on the characteristics of work injuries and illnesses based on State workers' compensation records.
BLS collected and is processing 1983 State workers' compensation data.
Standard SDS tabulations, showing distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by industry and occupation, as well as microdata, are available through the National Technical Information Service.
The data identify the nature and source of workplace injuries and illnesses, part(s) of body affected, type of accident or exposure, and other characteristics not available from the annual survey, and are used to focus on special problem areas, such as back injuries.
Work injury reports (WIR).
This survey program obtains detailed accident information directly from injured employees.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health use results of WIR studies to evaluate and develop safety standards, compliance strategy, and training programs.
Results from three WIR studies were published in fiscal year 1984: Falls from elevations, falls on stairs, and injuries in the logging industry.
Work on WIR surveys in progress includes warehouse workers, construction laborers, and thermal burn injuries.
Cost control, emphasized by the President and recommended by the President's Private Sector Survey on Cost Control in the Federal Government (the Grace Commission) has remained a high priority.
Computer service improvements.
A new contract was awarded to a private concern to provide the Bureau with computer services.
It provided for significantly improved services at lower cost and included a new provision—unique in the Department-for recouping losses due to the contractor's failure to meet specified standards.
At the same time, a new telecommunications network was introduced.
The new system, which replaced services discontinued by the Department, integrated communications between the national and the eight regional offices and involves computer-assisted data collection, editing, transmission, and publication.
Several pilot tests were run to identify the most effective uses of microcomputer technology in a local area network that is designed to connect microcomputers with the mainframe computers.
Managerial improvements for the cooperative programs.
The recently transferred managerial responsibility for the cooperative collection of Labor Market Information (LMI) with State governments from the Employment and Training Administration involved the immediate assumption of management responsibility for $25 million to be allocated to State programs to collect data.
After selecting the most appropriate contract instrument for the allocation of these resources, the Bureau worked closely with State agencies and BLS field personnel, who are involved in developing the data, to develop detailed specifications for State operations to be included in the contract.
Following this, a completely new computerized contract tracking system was put in place, which enables close monitoring of resources spent in the 50 States.
Confidentiality of Bureau data.
The Bureau continued its efforts to secure legislation that would provide legal assurance of confidentiality to survey respondents.
The Office of Management and Budget is developing similar legislation that would protect all Federal programs.
The Bureau cooperated in these broader efforts while at the same time seeking separate legislation to protect its own data until such time as the OMB proposal becomes operative.
Security of Bureau data.
In response to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's approval of a petition by the Coffee, Sugar, and Cocoa Exchange to sell futures contracts based on the Consumer Price Index, the Bureau moved to tighten its security measures to protect its data from premature release, which might provide a monetary advantage to speculators.
In fiscal 1984, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) continued its efforts to improve and promote workplace safety and health.
OSHA concentrated its efforts on the areas of regulation, enforcement, service, assistance and training in recognition of workplace hazards.
On the regulatory side, OSHA continued to produce standards that protect workers effectively and as cost-effectively as possible.
Further, OSHA continued to supplement safety and health standards and their enforcement with a cooperative approach to solve workplace safety and health problems.
Óne way OŠHA provided services was through its newly conceived consultation services program.
To better serve employees and employers, the consultation program was revised to expand the services consultants can offer to promote more comprehensive and enduring improvements to a workplace's safety and health program.
The changes will enable consultants to evaluate more fully and help improve an employer's total workplace safety and health program; conduct onsite training and education for workers and employers; and recommend employers for a 1-year exemption from routine OSHA inspections for worksites meeting certain criteria.
In addition, the Occupational Safety and Health Training Institute has developed and is offering more courses on the establishment and management of workplace health systems and programs.
One of OSHA's major focuses was to strengthen and expand the Integrated Management Information System (IMIS).
The program, begun in 1982 and more fully implemented in 1984, assures a more efficient operation of the area offices; more information about State operations; improved debt collection procedures; and more accurate and timely data concerning OSHA's enforcement activities.
Since its inception, the program has provided the information needed to manage dynamic occupational safety and health programs at the field and management levels.
During the fiscal year, OSHA issued several final standards.
The hazard communication standard, dated November 25, 1983, require employers to provide information on chemical hazards to about 14 million workers in some 300,000 manufacturing establishments, as well as to provide a flow of information to downstream chemical users.
It also establishes requirements for the labelling of chemical hazards, for preparation of material safety data sheets, and for a system to train workers to safely handle dangerous chemicals.
A new standard for occupational exposure to ethylene oxide (EtO), issued June 22, 1984 is designed to protect about 140,000 workers against cancer reproductive damage, and other health hazards.
Most worker exposure occurs in hospitals when EtO is used as a sterilant gas and in firms that manufacture medical products.
OSHA also issued an emergency temporary standard for asbestos on November 4, 1983, to lower the permissible limit for worker exposure to asbestos from 2 fibers of asbestos per cubic centimeter of air (2 f/cc) to 0.5 f/cc.
A proposed permanent revision to OSHA's asbestos standard followed the emergency temporary standard, which was stayed by Court action on March 7, 1984.
Although the proposal covers general industry, maritime, and construction employers, OSHA is considering whether to promulgate a separate standard for the construction industry.
OSA also proposed that agricultural employers who hire 11 or more farm workers for hand labor in the fields be required to provide toilet and handwashing facilities and potable water close to the employee's work location.
The proposal seeks to assure that elementary sanitation facilities are available to about 529,000 hand laborers in agricultural fields, as they are to workers in all other occupations under OSHA's jurisdiction.
A final standard was issued on February 3, 1984, to protect employees servicing potentially dangerous single-piece and multipiece rim wheels, and a rule to revoke approximately 150 advisory and repetitive standards was issued.
OSHA also proposed safety standards that will protect workers in oil and gas well drilling and servicing and grain handling facility employees from risks of fire and explosion; a proposed rule for construction cranes and derricks to cover hoisting of personnel, a revision to the standard on accident prevention tags, and a proposed rule for safety testing and certification of certain workplace equipment and materials.
In fiscal 1984, OSHA conducted 71,371 total inspections — the highest total in the past 8 years.
Of these inspections 87 percent were targeted to focus on high-hazard industries and worksites.
OSHA developed and refined a targeting program for safety inspections in the manufacturing sector.
This policy focuses walkaround inspections on individual workplaces with lost-workday case rates worse than the national average for manufacturing.
The policy, which went into effect on October 1, 1981, maximizes available resources by concentrating on worksites with the more serious hazards.
Also a Special Emphasis Program for safety inspections at grain elevators was extended.
Selected elevators will undergo complete safety checks to raise OSHA's profile in the industry and to promote management and labor attention to possible fire and explosion hazards.
During the year, the agency revised its Field Operations Manual and developed and issued an Industrial Hygiene Technical Manual to reflect current industrial hygiene practices and procedures.
OSHA also conducted approximately 700 health inspections in construction and manufacturing to check for violations of its asbestos standard.
To increase the usefulness of consultative assistance to employers, OSHA has expanded its scope by shifting the focus from simply the identification and correction of workplace hazards to a broader concern for the effectiveness of the employer's management system for ensuring a safe workplace.
Provisions also were added for offsite consultation, training and education of employers and their employees, and exemption from general schedule compliance inspections.
The central purpose of the expanded program is the prevention of workplace injuries and illnesses by assisting employers to establish effective workplace safety and health programs.
The consultation service is provided at no cost to the employer through Federal and State funds.
Aimed mainly at small business employers in more hazardous industries, consultation may cover all or part of the workplace in response to the employer's request.
The service is administered by State government agencies or universities utilizing staff separate from enforcement.
The service is confidential to the employer, and a request for consultation does not trigger a State or Federal inspection.
While the service is penalty free, the employer is required to take immediate action to eliminate employee exposure to an imminent danger situation and to correct any identified serious hazards within a reasonable time.
Participants in the nationwide exemption program are limited to fixed worksite employers who have 150 or fewer employees.
Such employers may be exempted from OSHA general schedule enforcement inspections (not complaint inspections or accident investigations) for a period of one year if they have: (1) received a comprehensive consultative visit; (2) corrected all hazards identified during the visit; and (3) demonstrated that an effective safety and health program is in operation.
OSHA expects that the expanded consultation program now offered will serve as an added incentive for employers to request and utilize full-service consultation, and thereby enhance the employer's ability to identify and control hazards.
In another important area, OSHA granted more than 18 approvals during the year to companies whose worksites met the criteria of its Voluntary Protection Programs.
The programs, Star, Try and Praise, were inaugurated in July 1982 to recognize firms with excellent safety and health programs.
The concept of the programs is based on the realization that workplace compliance with OSHA standards alone will never completely accomplish the goals of the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
Therefore, the programs are intended to supplement OSHA's enforcement effort by identifying the "cream"of the employer "crop"so that limited enforcement resources can be directed to workplaces where the most serious hazards exist and to encourage voluntary improvement and expansion of internal worker protection systems.
To date, 50 percent of the participants have reduced their already low injury rates under the Try program and Star participants have rates about 80 percent lower than their industry average.
During fiscal 1984, OSHA continued to foster the strong Federal/State relationship established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.
Twenty-five States and territories are administering their own OSHA-approved State plans.
Twenty-three of these State plans cover both private sector and State and local government employment while two, Connecticut and New York, are limited in scope to employees of the State and its political subdivisions.
In furtherance of this cooperative effort in the national occupational safety and health program, OSHA officials attended quarterly meetings held by State plan officials to assure the States' continued knowledge of and involvement in policy initiatives and other matters of mutual interest.
Granting final approval to Virgin Islands, Hawaii and Alaska State plans—the first final approvals ever granted.
Final approval is the last step in the State plan approval process and represents OSHA's judgment that the State plan in actual operation is “at least as effective"as the Federal program.
Authority for concurrent Federal jurisdiction is relinquished with final State plan approval.
Granting initial approval for New York to administer a State plan limited in scope to public employees of the State and its political subdivisions.
Certifying the Virginia State plan, bringing the number of certified State plans to 22.
Certification is a necessary prerequisite (attesting to structural completeness of the State plan) before OSHA can grant final approval to a State program based on the effectiveness of its actual performance.
Initiating a process to revise "fully effective"State staffing benchmarks in accord with the terms of the court order in AFL-CIO v. Marshall (C.A. No. 74–406).
The revision process relies on State-specific data.
Accepting 21 States as partners in OSHA's Integrated Management Information System, thus assuring the availability of much more comprehensive data on State and Federal performance.
Implementing the revised State plan monitoring and evaluation system with the initiation of routine computerized State Plan Activities Measures Reports, comparing State performance to Federal performance or other relevant criteria, as the basis for OSHA's monitoring.
Issuing a directive, after extensive coordination with the States, that revises and clarifies the process whereby OSHA reviews and approves State occupational safety and health standards promulgated pursuant to an approved State plan, and in particular the process for addressing State standards which differ substantively from the comparable OSHA standard.
Annual enrollment for compliance officers, State personnel, Federal safety and health representatives from other agencies, and the private sector is 7,105.
The safety and health training offered at the Institute is an important part of OSHA's efforts to use all of its resources to help employers and employees eliminate occupational safety and health hazards.
In addition to the 57 courses offered at the Institute, 12 courses will be conducted at sites away from the Institute where actual worksite situations can be experienced.
Also, the Office of Training and Education is developing materials, consisting of instructors'manuals and related slides, for OSHA field offices to use in conducting training sessions for other Federal agencies and for the private sector.
OSHA will offer six different courses for private sector personnel including one on safety and health for the maritime industry; two for construction; and three for general industry.
Other training and education achievements include: (1) cooperating with National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in promoting Project Minerva, a program to incorporate safety and health training in schools of business administration; (2) disseminating information to health care workers on the hazards of hepatitis B infection and recommending 15 work practices in caring for patients infected with hepatitis B virus; (3) cosponsoring three hazard communication seminars in January 1984 in cooperation with the American Conference on Chemical Labeling; and (4) sponsoring two 1-day orientation sessions in April 1984 at the OSHA Training Institute on safety and health recognition for attorneys and physicians.
OSHA also is developing guidelines for employers to follow in building their own safety and health training programs.
For example, OSHA issued model training guidelines for employers to provide employees more information and instruction on recognizing, avoiding, and preventing unsafe and unhealthful working conditions.
These guidelines are designed to help employers provide the information necessary for employees to work at minimal risk, and may be used by the employer to develop, conduct, evaluate and revise training programs for combatting any type of occupational safety and health hazard identified in the workplace.
It will also enable employers to identify employees at highest risk.
Also available are the standards digests and a booklet to help employers prepare for emergencies.
This booklet, "Emergency Response in the Workplace,"compiles for employers in one source both required and recommended strategies for preparing for workplace emergencies such as fires or chemical spills.
The booklet lists applicable OSHA standards and provides information on the agency's free consultation program and services offered by OSHA area offices.
Under its New Directions grant program, OSHA awarded $6.8 million to 107 nonprofit groups providing a variety of job safety and health services.
The grants support training and education projects addressing serious problems in construction, manufacturing, and other.
The New Directions grant program is designed to provide the funds an organization needs to develop its staff, skills and services to become a competent, self-sufficient center for job safety and health.
Grantees generally participate in the program for up to 5 years with some grantees also being funded for a 1-year planning phase in which the 5-year program is planned and organized.
During the fiscal year, $1.4 million of the $6.8 million was awarded to 26 new grantees.
These first-time program participants consisted of 14 labor organizations and 12 employer associations.
Sixteen of the new grants were for 1-year planning purposes.
Forty-five of the grantees awarded funds completed their program this year.
Most of these grantees now have become competent, self-sufficient centers for job safety and health.
This group consists of 18 labor organizations, 6 employer associations, 17 educational institutions, and 4 other nonprofit organizations.
In 1984, the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) concentrated on providing timely investigation of complaints of labor law violations and timely determination of workers'compensation claims.
By increasing efficiency and using automatic data processing systems, each ESA agency was able to achieve greater productivity and supply relief more quickly to workers covered by its programs.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) initiated a study to determine whether compliance reviews are being completed in a timely manner and whether there is a relationship between the length of a compliance review and the quality of that review.
OFCCP also began implementation of a Compliance Review Information System to enhance its ability to capture compliance review data used to evaluate both contractor and OFCCP performance.
And the agency's national office was restructured to maximize allocation of resources for effective program operation.
During fiscal 1984 OFCCP conducted a record 5,025 compliance reviews and 1,246 complaint investigations and reached financial agreements of $32,699,877 for 20,500 women, minorities, disabled persons and veterans, including outlays for training, future pay increases, backpay and increased recruitment.
Formal enforcement actions were filed against 25 firms.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted 64,155 compliance actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act, of which 44,264 were initiated as a result of complaints from workers or concerned citizens.
FLSA enforcement disclosed $33 million due 187,527 workers as a result of minimum wage violations, and $74 million due 260,741 employees as a result of overtime violations.
Employers agreed to pay $21 million in unpaid minimum wages to 150,318 workers and $57 million to 223,365 employees due overtime pay for a total of $78 million in FLSA back wages in fiscal 1984.
The Secretary's 1981 action removing the restrictions on the knitted outerwear industry was challenged in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia by the International Ladies' Garment Workers'Union and others.
While the lower court upheld the Department's action, the U.S. Court of Appeals reversed this decision on February 29, 1984, remanding the case to the District Court with instructions to reimpose the ban.
Responding to this decision the Department published in the Federal Register on March 27, a proposal to permanently lift the ban, and inviting comments.
The Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) continues to target the elimination of fraud, waste and mismanagement while improving claims determination services.
To further these goals, OWCP engaged in early-return-to-work efforts as a key element in the longterm case management of claimants in the Federal Employees'Compensation program, with other agencies participating in job search and reemployment efforts.
In addition, training courses were utilized for compensation specialists in processing and examining claims.
Accountability reviews continued to be used to provide greater quality control functions at the district level.
In September 1984, extensive amendments to the Longshore Act were enacted by Congress, the first amendments since 1972.
The Act was signed by President Reagan on September 28, 1984 with most of the substantive changes to go into effect ninety days thereafter.
The new law makes important changes in benefit schedules, it permits debarment of medical providers to insure the integrity of the program and increases penalties for fraudulent actions.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation continued to decentralize its claims operations to district offices to improve the quality and timeliness of its processing.
The Division recovered over $16.5 million from responsible mine operators, insurance carriers, beneficiaries and medical providers.
Monthly benefits payments to coal miners and their survivors totalled approximately $444 million.
Total payments by the program, including monthly benefit payments, retroactive payments to miners, and payments to medical providers totalled approximately $595 million.
Through coordination between OWCP rehabilitation specialists and FECA claims examiners, the Vocational Rehabilitation unit saved $8 million in Federal employees' compensation costs.
In the Longshore program, rehabilitation saved $3 million in compensation costs.
The Office of State Liaison and Legislative Analysis continued assistance to the States in various aspects of ESA programs.
The Legislative Analysis unit developed testimony and background information for ESA use in Congressional hearings, and provided technical assistance to the Congress on the Longshore and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act Amendments of 1984.
Employment Standards Programs unit responded to over 400 requests from State labor departments and others, and analyzed some 850 new State laws, publishing summaries of about 300 of them.
The unit is also compiling information on State prevailing wage laws.
During fiscal 1984, OFCCP conducted 5,025 compliance reviews of contractor facilities employing 2,940,540 workers to determine compliance with Executive Order 11246, as amended, and with the nondiscrimination and affirmative action provisions of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, and 38 USC 2012.
OFCCP conducted 1,246 investigations .
In addition, technical assistance was provided to 8,932 contractors outside of the compliance review process.
Examples of the assistance provided include helping contractors to arrange internal or external training and to locate recruitment and referral sources.
There were 465 agreements resulting from compliance reviews and complaints in which contractors committed a total of $32,699,877 in financial outlays for training, future pay increases, backpay and increased recruitment.
Of this total in financial settlements, $2,656,384 in backpay awards went to 496 women, minorities, disabled persons and veterans.
Formal enforcement actions, which may result in the removal of a contractor from eligibility to compete for Federal contracts, were filed against 25 firms.
During fiscal 1984, 42 liaison groups were formed.
These groups explore general compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
They contribute valuable input to OFCCP on ways to improve the compliance process and address aspects of affirmative action unique to their employment situations or industries.
OFCCP, in turn, provides advice, specific technical assistance and an exchange of information.
In 1,550 instances, OFCCP arranged ‘linkage"agreements between employers and agencies providing worker training or referral services.
OFCCP has continued to pursue several previous initiatives and has introduced new initiatives to enhance the effective functioning of the program.
1. Realignment of Field Offices and Reorganization of National Office—These initiatives were undertaken to improve the responsiveness of the agency to program needs, improve National Office support to the field, maximize the allocation of resources and to improve management of program operations.
2. Recognizing Contractor Performance—ÓFČCP has formalized its procedures for identifying and recognizing contractors which demonstrate exceptional performance in carrying out their nondiscrimination and affirmative action obligations.
This is the second year of this initiative, which was inaugurated in 1983.
3. Linkage Project—OFCCP, in conjunction with ESA's Research Division, has designed a study to determine the kinds and nature of linkages actually obtained, as well as their relationship to program accomplishments.
4. Average Hours Study—OFCCP has begun an indepth study to examine the relationship, if any, between the quality of compliance actions and the time expended to complete them, and to establish average hour standards reflective of the quality and complexity of compliance actions.
5. Compliance Review Information System (CRIS) — OFCCP has developed and completed full regional implementation of an automated management information system to meet program data requirements and provide a variety of tracking information on compliance reviews in process.
CRIS replaces the Automated Management Information System (AMIS) to improve the quality, integrity, and timeliness of data used in evaluating contractor performance, as well as the agency's own program performance.
This system provides a single source of information on all compliance review activities under direct OFCCP management control.
6 .
Microcomputer Prototype Project — The objective of this initiative is to determine if microcomputers can provide two important services not available in the current computer system: (1) whether it can provide Equal Opportunity Specialists with a more efficient tool for conducting case analysis and statistical analysis support, i.e., cohort analysis, impact ratios, job area acceptance ranges, standard deviation and statistical significance calculations, graphic analysis, etc.
In addition, OFCCP would gain knowledge of problems and needs arising from the introduction of microcomputers in all three levels of its organization; it would also provide OFCCP with important information about designing a microcomputer system that can be effectively meshed with ESA's mainframe computers.
7. Training Program — The training program is designed to assist Equal Opportunity Specialists (EOS's) in developing and enhancing the investigatory skills necessary to discharge their responsibilities in a thorough, fair and objective manner.
Working closely with ESA's training experts, OFCCP is developing a series of courses which address the needs of staff at all experience levels, from "new hires"through senior EOS's.
Timely response to complaints was the cornerstone of the Wage and Hour Division's enforcement strategy during fiscal year 1984.
The Division conducted 64,155 compliance actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act, of which 44,264 were initiated as a result of·complaints from workers or concerned citizens.
The inventory of complaints increased from 19,935 to 21,675.
The FLSA enforcement program disclosed $33 million due 187,527 workers as a result of minimum wage violations, and $74 million due 260,741 employees as a result of overtime violations.
Employers agreed to pay $21 million in unpaid minimum wages to 150,318 workers and $57 million to 223,365 employees due overtime pay for a total of $78 million in FLSA back wages in fiscal 1984.
The difference between the amount of back wages found due employees and the amount that employers agreed to pay reflects, for the most part, sums involved in pending litigation and the refusal of certain employers to pay back wages in cases the Department deemed unsuitable for litigation.
The FLSA permits individuals to bring private suits to collect back wages, liquidated damages, attorney's fees, and court costs.
The Department's enforcement statistics do not include the back wage amounts recovered in private suits.
The Special Targeted Enforcement Program (STEP) is aimed at discouraging employers from employing illegal aliens at less than legal wages.
Wage and Hour Division targets FLSA investigations in industries and localities where aliens have traditionally been found to be employed.
The purpose is to reduce the incentive for hiring those workers who tend to accept employment at less than the minimum wage and/or without proper overtime compensation.
In fiscal 1984, 16,860 STEP investigations were conducted.
The Wage and Hour Division found 8,877 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA during fiscal 1984.
The Division assessed over $1 million in child labor civil money penalties against 721 employers who were found to be illegally employing 6,563 minors.
A total of 144 exceptions were filed with the Wage and Hour Division by employers contending that penalties should not have been assessed and requesting a hearing before an administrative law judge.
Revitalization of the Work Experience and Career Exploration Program (WECEP) for 14- and 15-year-old youths likely to drop out of school was begun during this fiscal year in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Education and State education departments.
Twenty States presently participate in WECEP; improvement of existing programs and expansion of programs to other States is anticipated.
Section 14 of FLSA authorizes the Secretary of Labor, ‘to the extent necessary to prevent curtailment of opportunities for employment,"to provide for the employment of certain categories of workers at wage rates below the statutory minimum wage.
These categories include full-time students employed in retail or service establishments, agriculture, or institutions of higher education; learners; apprentices; handicapped workers and messengers.
Such employment must be authorized under special certificates issued pursuant to the Secretary's regulations.
The Division issued 41,211 certificates during fiscal 1984 authorizing the employment of approximately 418,810 workers at less than the minimum wage.
Full-time students and handicapped workers employed by sheltered workshops accounted for, respectively, 53 and 44 percent of the workers employed under certificates.
The Secretary's Advisory Committee on Sheltered Workshops met in November 1983 and May 1984 to consider, among other matters, revisions to the regulations governing the authorization of special minimum wages for handicapped workers employed by sheltered workshops.
The committee provides advice and recommendations to the Secretary on the administration and enforcement of the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and the Service Contract Act as these laws apply to the employment of handicapped workers by sheltered workshops, hospitals, and institutions.
Since the 1940's, homework has been restricted in only seven industries.
In October 1981, following an extended period of public hearings and comment, the Department removed the restrictions in one of these industries, knitted outerwear.
The Secretary's action removing the restrictions was challenged in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia by the International Ladies' Garment Workers'Union and others.
The District Court upheld the Department's action, but upon appeal the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia reversed, holding that the Department's decision had not been adequately justified.
It therefore remanded the case on February 29, 1984 to the District Court, with instructions to reimpose the ban.
Following reinstatement of the ban, the Department, on March 27, published in the Federal Register a proposal to permanently lift the ban, and requested comments on total recision of the ban and on four specific alternatives.
The special wage rates for American Samoa, which are lower than the minimum wage for the mainland United States, are established under authority of the 1956 amendments to the FLSA.
These amendments extended the Act's coverage to Samoa and adopted the industry committee procedures for determining the rates.
Under this procedure, the committee is convened at least once every two years to review the existing rates.
The objective is to raise the rates to the mainland level as rapidly as is economically feasible without reducing job opportunities.
Industry Committee #16, appointed by the Secretary, held public hearings in April 1984 to review the minimum wage rates in American Samoa.
At the conclusion of the hearings, higher minimum wage rates were established for all industries.
The increases affected more than 3,500 employees engaged in nontraditional government activities.
The minimum wage increases affected some 15 industry groups covered by FLSA.
Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA), which replaced the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act (FLCRA), effective April 14, 1983, provides important worker protections to migrant and seasonal agricultural workers, including vehicle safety, housing safety and health requirements, disclosure of wages, hours and working conditions, maintenance of necessary records and provision to workers of itemized information concerning pay and withholding.
MSPA covers employees of farm labor contractors, as well as those employed by fixed situs employers such as farmers.
MSPA requires farm labor contractors to register with the Department of Labor and to comply with all the provisions of the Act, unless statutorily exempt.
During fiscal 1984, there were 12,500 registrants (including 9,400 farm labor contractors and 3,100 farm labor contractor employees) who employed approximately 375,000 crew members.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted 5,273 MSPA compliance actions during fiscal 1984 which resulted in civil money penalties totaling almost $900,000 assessed against violators.
In addition, there have been 190 revocations, refusals to issue and refusals to renew farm labor contractor certificates of registration.
MSPA also prohibits a farm labor contractor from knowingly employing illegal aliens.
In enforcing this provision, the Wage and Hour Division works closely with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
In fiscal 1984, 164 farm labor contractors were cited for employing a total of 1,398 illegal alien workers.
A number of investigations which evidenced possible criminal violations of other statutes were referred to the Justice Department in fiscal 1984.
The National Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committee and regional coordination committees, comprised of representatives of the regional and national offices of the Employment Standards Administration, the Employment and Training Administration, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, continued to coordinate programs and services that have impact on migrant and seasonal agricultural workers.
Government contract enforcement concentrated on complaints alleging violations of the various laws that provide labor standards for employees performing government contract work.
During fiscal 1984, 4,117 investigations were conducted under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the Service Contract Act, the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Back wages found due to 44,803 workers under the provisions of these laws totaled $26 million.
Employers agreed to pay $19 million of these back wage amounts to 38,697 workers.
Additional monies were to be restored upon completion of administrative hearings or litigation action.
Pursuant to the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, 11,052 prevailing wage determinations were issued during the fiscal year.
Of this total, 1,074 were general determinations published in the Federal Register which apply to many construction contracts in a given geographic area, and 9,980 were issued for specific construction projects.
Various alternatives for improving the collection of wage data used in making Davis-Bacon wage determinations continued to be explored.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, on July 5, 1983, largely reversed a District Court ruling which had enjoined certain major provisions of the Department's May 1982 revised Davis-Bacon regulations.
On January 16, 1984, the U.S. Supreme Court denied review of the Appeals Court decision.
The Department intends to implement these regulations in accordance with the Appeals Court decision.
When fully implemented, the revised regulations are expected to result in an annual savings of several hundred million dollars to Federal agencies and contractors.
The Wage and Hour Division issued over 3,500 determinations of prevailing wages- and-fringe oenefits for a wide variety of job classifications under the Service Contract Act.
These wage determinations apply to approximately 34,000 contracts.
On January 27, 1984, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia upheld the Department's revised Service Contract Act regulations published October 27, 1983, in a suit filed by the AFL-CIO and individual unions.
The AFL-CIO has appealed that decision.
On May 17, 1984, President Reagan submitted to the Congress, the "Youth Employment Opportunity Wage Act of 1984."The bill was designed to increase the employment opportunities for young people by establishing a special minimum wage for them during the summer months.
The bill provided that employers could pay youths under 20 years of age 75 percent of the Federal minimum wage, or $2.50 per hour, whichever is less, during the period May 1 through September 30.
It would also have prohibited any employer from discharging, transferring, or demoting any other employee in order to hire a worker at the youth wage.
The Federal Employees' Compensation Program in fiscal 1984 was directed toward the early return of claimants to suitable employment as the key to its long-term case management.
By fully implementing its case management process, relying on early specialist referral and job search for partially disabled claimants, FECA encouraged agencies to identify and promote job opportunities for recipients.
As a result, several Government agencies responded to OWCP outreach programs by entering into agreements to rehabilitate and reemploy their former employees.
The Division also negotiated an agreement with the Office of Personnel Mangement to share in the Federal Personnel Manual issuance series, and to support an advanced training course for agency compensation specialists, in order to speed and improve the presentation of employee claims.
Under a major interagency agreement with the Army Materiel Command, to run until March 1985, the Division has been training 9,400 first-line supervisors in compensation claims processing.
The Division also assisted the Departments of the Treasury and Agriculture, the Social Security Administraton, and other agencies to design national compensation programs which will improve service to employees.
Within the Employment Standards Administration, a Model Compensation Program has been developed to standardize claims processing, including training of regional compensation coordinators and first-line supervisors.
OWCP increased the use of accountability review teams and programwide quality control measures.
District offices are required to demonstrate that they are staffing and performing a wide range of quality control functions, and program performance analyses are provided regularly to district office managers.
Two regions are testing the concept of a decentralized hearing function, with hearing examiners based in the regional city and covering several States, to determine whether timeliness is served by decentralization.
The Division introduced and delivered a new comprehensive claims examiner course to claims examiners nationwide.
In addition to techniques of claims adjudication, the new course addresses caseload management and efficient case processing.
OWCP made significant and far-reaching changes in the accounting procedures it uses in the FECA program to charge Government agencies for the amount of expenses incurred by the program on their behalf.
Specifically, this chargeback process was modified to establish a uniform system for agencies to track injury costs to specific agency installations; procedures were also established for resolving disagreement concerning chargeback billing and to establish coding procedures which conform with Federal injury reporting requirements.
In addition, basic data on employee claims from the automated data processing system are being provided weekly to the U.S. Postal Šervice and daily to the Tennessee Valley Authority.
In fiscal 1984, the Division continued its efforts to ensure timely payment of benefits and provision of medical services to injured workers in the maritime industry and under other related acts.
The district offices reduced the inventory of cases awaiting action by approximately 16 percent during the year.
More timely case processing action was achieved in the following areas: processing controverted claims, completing informal conferences, issuing conference memoranda and responding to inquiries.
More than 6,700 informal conferences were held by the Division's district offices for cases requiring resolution of disputed issues.
In September 1984, extensive amendments to the Longshore Act were enacted by Congress, the first amendments since 1972.
The amendments clarify and limit the Act's jurisdiction, make changes in benefits, permit debarment for cause of medical providers and claimant representatives, establish a method of providing benefits for victims of covered occupational diseases, and include other reforms.
In several instances, penalties for fraudulent actions are increased.
During fiscal 1985, a major effort for the Longshore Division will be the promulgation of implementing regulations and procedures and the development of an extensive technical assistance program directed toward education of the affected maritime industry and workers.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers'Compensation continued the decentralization of the program during fiscal 1984.
Office under the 1977 amendments to the law were transferred to district offices closer to claimants'homes.
The Division is also completing the decentralization of Medical Benefits Only claims to district offices closer to claimants.
In addition, district office functions will be expanded to include adjudication of Certificates of Medical Necessity (CMN), needed to approve durable medical equipment, including home oxygen, home nursing services, and pulmonary rehabilitation treatment.
The district offices will begin the review and processing of medical determination billing prior to authorizing payment to improve the quality of the tests, to increase timeliness, and control those related costs.
An accountability review program, expanded in fiscal 1984, includes an annual review of every district office.
During fiscal 1984, the Division received 8,220 new claims and 4,114 refiled claims.
Decisions were made on 13,497 claims.
At the end of the fiscal year there were 5,576 claims pending an initial decision.
The Division also held 2,644 informal conferences and forwarded 10,010 claims to the Office of Administrative Law Judges for formal hearing.
The Office of Administrative Law Judges returned 5,435 claims to the Division, where the decisions and orders were reviewed and necessary actions taken.
Additional workload included maintenance of approximately 110,000 Medical Benefits Only claims, 91,836 Trust Fund monthly benefits claims, 5,969 claims in interim pay pending a formal hearing, and 3,106 claims in which responsible mine operators were paying monthly benefits.
As a result of debt collection activities, the Black Lung division recovered over $16.5 million from responsible mine operators, insurance carriers, beneficiaries and medical providers.
Approximately $595 million was paid in benefits to coal miners, eligible survivors, and medical providers.
Of this amount, approximately $444 million was paid to miners and their survivors as monthly benefit payments.
The Division of Vocational Rehabilitation continued its efforts to provide timely, high quality vocational rehabilitation services during fiscal 1984.
Procedures were improved for the return to work of those injured under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act by increasing coordination between the OWCP rehabilitation specialists and FECA claims examiners.
The Division developed new policies, procedures, and forms to assist OWCP rehabilitation specialists in managing State and private sector rehabilitation counselors.
These counselors are paid by OWCP to provide testing, evaluation, counseling, guidance, placement and followup services to injured Federal workers.
The new procedures prescribe the process by which counselors are recruited and selected, trained, used for referrals, evaluated and developed, and terminated.
During the year, 695 injured Federal workers were rehabilitated under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, saving more than $11,500 per worker in compensation costs.
Total savings for the year were $8 million in compensation costs.
Also in fiscal 1984, 311 workers in the private sector were rehabilitated under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, saving more than $10,000 per worker in compensation costs.
Total compensation costs saved for the year were $3 million.
During fiscal 1984, OWCP continued its efforts to reduce fraud, waste, and mismanagement.
In the Federal Employees' Compensation Program, standards for the development and adjudication of claims and effective case management have been enforced to assure that claims are processed in a timely manner and in accordance with the laws and regulations.
The investigation of questionable claims through the use of Wage-Hour and OFCCP compliance officers has been successful in reducing the number of claimants on the rolls who are no longer eligible for benefits.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers’ Compensation participated with the Social Security Administration in computer matching to ensure integrity of monthly benefits payments to black lung beneficiaries.
The Division continued to work closely with the OIG on active investigations, in several regions, of some medical providers and others suspected of fraud by the Division.
To address issues of security and loss vulnerabilty in the Federal Employees'Compensation program, a Fraud Awareness and Sensitivity training course was developed, with the cooperation of the Office of Inspector General, and delivered to field office managers.
Regulations permitting the program to exclude medical providers convicted of fraud against Government programs and other abuses were completed in May 1984, and procedures for identifying such abuses were distributed to the regions.
Regulations to control medical costs in the program, by application of a schedule of maximum fees for numerous medical, surgical and laboratory services, were published for comment in the Federal Register in June 1984.
Procedures to regularize the procurement of medical services by OWCP by placing regular medical consultants under contract were put in place in January 1984.
A match of FECA records against Office of Personnel Management records identified a significant number of persons who had received prohibited dual payments for periods of time, and collecting the overpayments was begun by each agency.
They will conduct regular semi-annual matches of their beneficiary rolls.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation began implementing procedures for improving security to minimize fraud within the claims process, as well as conducting periodic audits which will ensure the integrity of the benefit payment system.
Work continued throughout fiscal 1984 on the Federal Employees' Compensation Level Ⅱ automated data processing system, which is scheduled to be fully operational in all district offices by the end of fiscal year 1986.
A contract for this major new system was awarded in fiscal 1984, and an Employment Standards Administration project team was assembled to supervise and review contract deliverables.
Ultimately, the system will provide ADP support for all of ESA's major programs.
Initially, it will integrate FEC's payment and case monitoring system, automate various fiscal functions, reduce manual processing of medical payments, and provide automated support for a wide range of claims adjudication, medical services, and rehabilitation activities.
The system will require new organizational patterns, which are being developed through a series of work groups, with field office participation.
As work on Level I continued, the Level I automated system which has been in'use for several years was enhanced to provide better tracking of cases in which OWCP might be able to recover compensation costs from liable third parties; to provide automated identification and retirement of inactive cases, and to provide payment of benefits on a cycle coordinated with the Federal pay cycle.
Similarly, the Longshore program also made progress toward automating its district office operations.
At year's end, a case management system was under development which will provide automated case review, case tracking and word processing capability.
The system is scheduled to be pilot tested in a district office in fiscal 1985, and is expected to be fully operational in fiscal 1986.
The National Office of the Longshore Division implemented a Special Fund automated data processing enhancement in fiscal 1984 to calculate second injury retroactive benefits, speeding up the previously time-consuming process and ensuring greater accuracy.
The Black Lung Program's contractual agreement for its current automated claims information and benefit payment system expires at the end of fiscal 1985.
During fiscal 1984, the Division developed a procurement plan and requests for information and proposals for the major services contract which will provide ADP support commencing in fiscal 1986.
To fulfill the program's obligations under the current contract, continuing in-house audits have been conducted on the contractor's bill payment methods for both in-hospital and outpatient claims for consistency with program policy and procedures.
The Division of Legislative Analysis developed testimony and background information for ESA officials who appeared at hearings before committees of the Senate and House of Representatives.
It played an active role in providing technical assistance to the Congress on the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act Amendments of 1984.
The Division participated in the development of the youth employment opportunity wage legislation proposed by the Administration, and monitored and prepared notes on Congressional action on immigration reform and other program areas of interest to ESA.
The Division also developed issue papers for legislative decisions and regulatory materials required under Executive Order 12291.
The Division of State Employment Standards Programs furnished expertise to ESA on State labor standards legislation, regulations and programs, and on issues which impact on, or are affected by, all ESA programs except workers' compensation.
In order to promote improved Federal/State coordination of similar programs, the Division developed considerable information on State employment standards relating to minimum wage, prevailing wage, industrial homework, child labor, and affirmative action requirements for employment of handicapped persons.
The Division is compiling information on State prevailing wage laws.
The Division provided technical advisory assistance and information on numerous labor standards subjects in response to over 400 requests from State labor departments, management organizations, multi-State employers, organized labor, other Federal agencies, the Congress, and others.
Throughout the year, the Division maintained active working relationships with State governmental labor officials and their organizations.
It analyzed some 850 new State labor laws and published summaries of approximately 300 of these.
The Division of State Workers'Compensation Programs provided technical assistance to State workers' compensation agencies on information systems, administration and rehabilitation.
Fifteen State workers'compensation agencies requested and received on-site technical assistance in the implementation or improvement of their information system.
In conjunction with the International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commissions (LAIABC), the division gathered information on, and published, an in-depth profile on the administration of each State workers' compensation agency entitled State Workers'Compensation Administration Profiles.
The Division worked closely with six States in arranging and conducting workers'compensation conferences for educational purposes and/or to focus on issues for possible legislative changes.
As a central source of information concerning State workers compensation laws, the Division analyzed 141 workers'compensation amendments from 1,100 proposed amendments during fiscal 1984 and prepared nine reports and analyses of State workers' compensation laws.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) made special efforts to improve hazard awareness among miners and mine management as the mining industry expanded in fiscal 1984.
Increasing production required extra attention to safe work practices as new mines opened, others reopened, and miners began new jobs or returned to work.
About 17,000 more miners were employed in the first 9 months of calendar 1984 than in the same period of calendar 1983.
Mining fatalities numbered 163 in fiscal 1984.
This represented an increase from the record-breaking low of 131 in fiscal 1983, but remained far below fatality figures in earlier years.
There were 244 mining deaths in fiscal 1980, 222 in fiscal 1981, and 237 in fiscal 1982.
Compared with calendar 1983, the rate of fatal injuries showed a slight increase both in coal mining and in metal and nonmetal (noncoal) mining during the first 9 months of 1984.
Preliminary data indicate that the rate of all injuries declined to a new low at coal mines and increased slightly at metal and nonmetal operations.
On November 18, 1983, David A. Zegeer was confirmed as assistant secretary of labor for mine safety and health.
He replaced former Assistant Secretary Ford B. Ford, who had become Under Secretary of Labor.
Under the direction of Assistant Secretary Zegeer, several new programs were started to promote hazard awareness in the mining industry.
Inspectors made special mine visits to warn of increases in certain types of fatal accidents and to discuss safe practices with the management and miners.
For use in industry's training programs, graphic depictions of all fatal accidents since Jan. 1, 1983, were made available free of charge in 35-mm slide format.
New training materials for supervisors and foremen were developed and distributed.
With the support of industry groups, labor and other government agencies, MSHA sponsored a new program to reduce coal mine fatalities and injuries due to roof falls—historically, the most frequent cause of fatal accidents in the coal mines.
Training materials on safe ventilation practices to prevent explosions also were distributed to the coal mining community.
MSHA worked with other industry groups to produce audiovisual training materials for cement workers and on-the-job training guides for the sand, gravel and stone indstries.
Besides these new efforts, MSHA maintained several special emphasis programs that focus on high-hazard operations.
The agency stressed cooperation and communication with management, labor, and State agencies as the best means to reduce mining injuries and illnesses.
Among other meetings and conferences with industry and labor, MSHA sponsored a symposium on controlling respirable dust, the most serious health hazard in coal mining.
It was the first national conference on the subject since Congress enacted limits on coal mine dust levels.
Several projects to review MSHA regulations continued in fiscal 1984.
A new final rule updated and consolidated standards for wire ropes that are used to hoist miners or to hoist materials where personnel could be endangered.
Major reviews progressed on eight groups of metal and nonmetal mine safety and health standards, and on underground coal mine safety regulations.
During fiscal 1984, MSHA oversaw coal miners'safety and health at 1,904 underground mines, 2,092 surface mines, and 985 other surface facilities under the agency's jurisdiction.
Coal mine employment and production both were on the increase during the fiscal year.
Coal mine inspectors, technical specialists, education and training specialists, and supervisors operated from 10 district offices, 18 subdistrict offices, and 68 field offices.
At the end of fiscal 1984, the coal mine safety and health work force numbered 1,720.
During fiscal 1984, MSHA made 77,114 coal mine inspections and investigations.
Of these, 55,230 were at underground mines, 13,699 at surface mines, and 8,185 at other surface facilities.
MSHA inspectors issued 111,080 citations and orders to coal mine operators and independent contractors for violations of safety and health regulations.
Supervisory officials held 2,120 health and safety conferences to discuss inspectors'findings at the request of mine operators or labor representatives.
After a rise in some types of accidents during early 1984, MSHA took steps to alert the coal induștry to these trends and urge extra caution.
On June 12, the agency suspended its regular activities in four Appalachian districts so inspectors, supervisors and specialists could make special visits to the underground mines in their areas.
They talked with both management and miners about safe work practices, especially in roof control and use of explosives.
On July 26, more than 800 inspectors and training specialists made similar visits to surface coal operations throughout the nation.
They inspected all rubber-tired haulage equipment and discussed haulage safety with equipment operators, supervisors and maintenance personnel.
MSHA investigated 181 complaints of safety- or health-related discrimination that coal mine personnel filed with the agency during the fiscal year.
The agency also opened 61 investigations into possible knowing or willful violations of coal mine safety or health regulations.
Coal mining fatalities numbered 90 in fiscal 1984, up from the record-breaking low of 76 in fiscal 1983, but fewer than in previous years, when coal mine fatalities had always exceeded 100.
The fatality rate also increased slightly; in the first 9 months of calendar 1984, it was 0.05 per 200,000 employee-hours compared with 0.04 in all of calendar 1983.
However, the rate of all coal mining injuries declined from the historical low of 6.87 per 200,000 employee-hours in calendar 1983 to 6.69 in the first 9 months of calendar 1984 (preliminary data).
Two coal mine accidents attracted national attention during the fiscal year.
On February 16, 1984, a methane explosion killed three miners at the Greenwich Collieries No. 1 Mine, Indiana County, Pa.
At the fiscal year's end, MSHA's investigation into the cause of the explosion was continuing.
On September 12, 1984, four miners were killed and two others injured in a roof fall at the Berger No. 2 Mine, Bon Trucking Co., Inc., Evarts, Ky.
MSHA investigators found violations of the Berger No. 2 Mine's approved roof control plan.
Besides the four annual inspections required by law, MSHA now makes monthly inspections at all coal mines in that area where a similar mining method is used.
Of the 90 coal mine fatalities in fiscal 1984, 31 were due to falls of the roof, face or ribs (walls) in underground coal mines.
Historically, such accidents are the most frequent cause of coal mine fatalities.
In April 1984, MSHA announced a new program titled Roof Evaluation—Accident Prevention (REAP).
Several industry and labor organizations and State and Federal Government agencies joined MSHA in sponsoring the REAP program, with the goal of reducing deaths and injuries due to roof falls.
As part of the program, MSHA inspectors increased their emphasis on safe roof control practices.
The agency also distributed technical information and training aids on roof control.
Emphasis also was placed on proper ventilation to keep explosive methane gas from building up in underground workings.
MSHA provided new training materials on ventilation to underground mine operators.
MSHA's Nonfatal Days Lost (NFDL) accident reduction program included 225 coal mines during its 1984 operating year (July 1983 through June 1984).
The mines chosen for this program had injury incidence rates above the average for their district or the Nation.
MSHA offers special help in eliminating the underlying causes of accidents at each mine in the NFDL program.
Success depends on the active participation of management, miners and their representatives.
During fiscal 1984, about 67 percent of the mines in the NFDL program succeeded in reducing their injury rates.
MSHA conducted an annual review of the program to improve its effectiveness.
In fiscal 1983, MSHA started a program to improve compliance with respirable dust standards in mining sections where these standards had repeatedly been violated.
In fiscal 1984, the program's goals were expanded to include reducing uncorrected violations.
In conjunction with other Federal agencies, MSHA developed a new course on noise control in coal mining.
Offered at the National Mine Health and Safety Academy, the course will be open to coal mine inspectors and industry.
In fiscal 1984, MSHA's Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health activity was responsible for promoting safety and health at about 730 underground mines and about 12,600 surface mines, quarries, sand and gravel operations, and mineral mills.
Activity was on the increase in some types of metal and nonmetal mining during the fiscal year.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors and specialists operated from 6 district offices, 12 subdistrict offices, and 53 field offices throughout the Nation.
The activity's workforce numbered 582 employees.
During the fiscal year, 12,396 complete regular inspections were made at metal and nonmetal mines and mills.
Another 962 regular inspections were made at mines that were not actively producing—for example, operations with only a crew performing maintenance work.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors issued 19,639 citations and orders during the fiscal year.
Inspectors made 4,763 compliance followup inspections to check for correction of violations that had previously been cited.
About 1,900 other inspections were made at gassy mines (mines that liberate explosive methane gas), at electrical installations, at mines using hoisting equipment, and during shaft sinking.
At the request of management or labor, 415 health and safety conferences were held with supervisory personnel to discuss inspectors'findings in about 1,500 citations and orders.
Metal and nonmetal mine training specialists conducted about 1,500 classes, meetings and visits to mine sites during the fiscal year.
During the week of August 13 to 17, MSHA conducted a special program of safety visits to metal and nonmetal surface mines.
More than 300 inspectors, training specialists and other officials visited mines throughout the country to call attention to an increase in fatalities, check for safety violations, and discuss safe work practices with management and miners.
Special investigations were made in response to 42 complaints of safety- or health-related discrimination and 87 possible knowing and willful violations.
Enforcement personnel also made 239 inspections or investigations in response to hazard complaints.
Metal and nonmetal mining fatalities numbered 73 in fiscal 1984.
This figure represented an increase from the record-breaking low of 55 in fiscal 1983, but was lower than in any earlier fiscal year.
The fatal-injury incidence rate was .04 per 200,000 employeehours for January-September 1984, compared with .03 for all of calendar 1983.
The rate of all injuries also increased slightly, from 4.36 in all of calendar 1983 to 4.45 in the first three quarters of calendar 1984 (preliminary data).
Two special emphasis programs continued during the fiscal year.
The Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) included 57 operations with injury rates significantly higher than the national average.
Mines in the PAR program received extra consultative help with safety programs, job safety analysis, accident prevention, and safety awareness.
Between October 1983 and June 1984, PAR operations achieved a 22-percent reduction in lost workday injuries and a 28-percent reduction in their injury incidence rate.
Compliance Assistance Visits (CAV's), started in 1980, also continued in fiscal 1984.