American workers continued to ride the crest of a growing economy during the 1985 fiscal year.
This economy produced a record number of jobs.
As of September 1985, when the fiscal year ended, there were nearly 109.3 million Americans at work, the largest percentage of the population gainfully employed in our history.
Over 8½ million workers had been added to American payrolls since the economic recovery began 34 months earlier.
Workers also benefited from a mild annual inflation rate of 3.2 percent in fiscal 1985.
This moderate inflation rate, one of the lowest since 1967, contributed to the rise in the buying power of workers'paychecks and added to the nation's record productivity, the highest in the world.
The moderate rate of inflation and the record productivity also nurtured the roots of future domestic growth and enhanced our ability to compete in world markets.
The economic recovery helped 1,800,000 Americans rise above the poverty level in a 12-month period.
Of these, over a half million were children—the largest annual reduction in childhood poverty in our history.
The poverty rate for older Americans dropped to its lowest point in history, too.
Despite problems in a few industries, the resurgent American economy was pulling $100 million worth of investment from other countries into the United States each year, a solid vote of confidence by the rest of the world in American workers and industry.
In the 12-month period ending in September 1985, our economy created 640,000 new businesses, an average of more than 50,000 a month.
This was especially good news for workers because one-half of all jobs in the last 10 years had been created in firms less than 4 years old.
Looking back, American workers were enjoying the strongest recovery since World War II.
As the year ended, we could take strong satisfaction in this; but we realized that we must help even more Americans join in the prosperity—those still left out of the economic mainstream.
Our tasks at the Labor Department include providing training for persons lacking skills compatible with new technologies, helping dislocated workers regain a foothold in the job marketplace, and providing more opportunities for young workers.
As our management team moved into the Labor Department, midway through the 1985 fiscal year, we viewed a picture favorable to most American workers.
It was imperative, nevertheless, that we take steps to improve the department's management efficiency and its delivery of services to the public.
To determine just where remedial action was needed, I appointed 10 high level task forces within the Department.
The scope of these task forces coincided with problem areas that arose during congressional confirmation hearings and ones that were surfaced by our transition team.
Their recommendations coincided fairly closely with findings of a recent General Accounting Office draft report on Departmental management.
Employee Retirement Income Security Act enforcement.
Expediting the regulatory process.
Procurement management.
Information resources management.
Mine Safety and Health Administration inspections.
Job Training Partnership Act oversight.
Unemployment insurance oversight.
Workforce planning.
Accounting controls.
Stronger direction by my office.
The most urgent recommendations were immediately put into effect.
At the same time, we developed a new management system whose major components were to include: a four-step goal setting and progress measurement process, a timetable for implementation of department-wide and specific agency goals, a procedure for tracking progress and providing me with feedback, and a long range planning schedule for budget needs and establishment of future goals and initiatives.
To improve economic opportunities for American workers by increasing their prospects for worthwhile employment and strengthening protection of their health and safety, retirement and other legal rights.
To increase our nation's ability to compete successfully in the world economy by promoting more labor-management cooperation in the United States, making Federal regulations more cost-effective, and improving basic education and training and retraining for present and future American workers.
To improve effectiveness of the department's operations by increasing our own productivity, encouraging creativity among employees, strengthening employee motivation, providing more and better coordination among Departmental units, and greater private sector support.
I was sworn into office April 29, 1985, following confirmation by the Senate.
From October 1, 1984, until I assumed office, the day-to-day operations of the department were handled by Under Secretary Ford B. Ford.
A major initiative during this period was the Department's campaign to build public and congressional support for passage of a Youth Employment Opportunity Wage (YEOW).
I believe that this nation has failed to cope adequately with the persistently high rate of unemployment among youths.
If we do not solve this problem, we may be faced with a permanent underclass of unemployable, or marginally employable men and women.
This problem is so pressing that various solutions must be tried to find a combination of approaches that works.
Obviously, one possible solution is the youth opportunity wage.
As an incentive to employers to hire young people, and give them their vital first job, they would be allowed to pay 16 to 19-year olds $2.50 an hour, rather than the federal minimum wage of $3.35, during the summer months.
As the fiscal year ended, the YEOW proposal had not been enacted, but we hope for passage in 1986.
After years of federal inaction on the issue of field sanitation facilities for agricultural workers, the Department announced in September 1985 that states would have 18 months to develop and implement their own rules for effective field sanitation; if they fail to act, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration will issue an appropriate regulation.
Basic human decency, as well as health considerations, dictate that farm workers be provided with drinking water, handwashing and toilet facilities.
I believe our decision in this matter is a balanced approach consistent with the traditional state role in public health and OSHA's responsibility to protect workers.
In September 1985, with thousands of American shoeworkers out of work because of foreign imports, I called on the governors of major shoe-producing states to help me draft specific proposals to help these people find new jobs and qualify for retraining and relocation assistance if necessary.
An initial $5 million was committed under the Job Training Partnership Act in response to President Reagan's request that Federal assistance be provided in lieu of shoe import barriers.
Still another problem needing quick action was eliminating the backlog of claims under the black lung benefits program.
We determined to end'the intolerable delays that had held up benefits in some cases for years and caused extra hardships for elderly people in coal mining regions.
As a result, recommendations were developed to end this backlog within 4 years and we asked the Congress for support of a plan, based on findings of one of the 10 internal task forces.
A series of specific productivity improvements within the Office of Administrative Law Judges (OALJ) and Benefits Review Board (BRB).
Adding 14 administrative law judges and 40 attorneys and support staff to the OALJ.
Adding an additional panel of three judges and 40 attorneys and support staff to the BRB.
Adding 38 personnel to the Solicitor's Office, including 28 attorneys and 10 support staff members.
As the fiscal year ended, there were several matters pending that would not be resolved until fiscal year 1986.
We were in the midst of efforts to secure legislative relief for state and local governments from paying overtime under the Supreme court's Garcia vs. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority ruling, which extended coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act to state and local governments.
We held that a compromise had to be acceptable to both state and local governments and to unions representing their employees.
That this compromise was finally achieved is a tribute to congressional leadership.
We also sought solutions for the problems of workers whose plants closed down with little or no warning.
A Task Force on Economic Adjustment and Worker Dislocation to explore possible solutions to these problems was named in October 1985.
An event of historical significance during the year was observance of the Bureau of Labor Statistics'centennial.
In addition to a ceremonial gathering sponsored jointly by the Department and the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress, the Department published a historical volume, The First Hundred Years of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, to coincide with the event.
These actions took place against a backdrop of changes in the economy and in the kinds of jobs many workers performed.
Competition in the world marketplace was becoming more severe.
New ways had to be developed to further increase productivity of both workers and industry.
The old adversarial relationship between management and labor needed to be replaced by a more cooperative approach, with government as the catalyst.
Encouragement of labor management cooperation has become a priority of the Labor Department.
Other deep-seated economic problems had to be confronted.
As technology changed rapidly, the need for better basic education in the United States became apparent.
In the future, the average worker would have to make three or four career shifts in a lifetime to keep working in the changing technological scene.
American public education in 1985 was not adequately preparing workers for the future.
Too many students were dropping out of school, or failing to master basic concepts of language, numbers and logical thinking.
They would need these concepts to compete for jobs in the later '80s and beyond.
Otherwise, we would face the prospect of millions of unemployable people, dependent upon public aid.
In 1985, it was obvious that America must revive the traditions of integrity of workmanship and dedication to achievement.
Facing the dual challenges of a changing technology and increasing foreign competition, labor and management would have to work together, or both would fail.
Yet we continued to enjoy prosperity.
The economy was growing.
Inflation remained low, and a record number of Americans were working as the year ended.
It was imperative that we look to the future and help more Americans join in this prosperity and, at the same time, keep the gains we had made.
In this respect, 1985 was a time both of hope, and one of challenge.
During the 1985 fiscal year, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) refined its new training and employment system established by the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
This enhanced ETA's ability to provide efficient management and fiscal oversight of all its programs.
At the fiscal year's end, JTPA had been fully and successfully implemented, and the new public-private delivery system was operating effectively in all states and service delivery areas (SDA's).
The program's placement rate nationally was significantly exceeding expectations.
Initiating a wide-range policy review to develop an assessment system designed to improve accuracy and timeliness of unemployment compensation revenue and payment activities.
Starting a management information system for comprehensive monitoring of performance standards under JTPA.
Fiscal year 1985 marked the second year of ETA's administration of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
The JTPA was enacted into law in October 1982 and became fully operational in October 1983.
The JTPA is operated on the basis of a program year (PY).
The law provides that the program operate based on a 2-year planning cycle.
The first full 2-year cycle began on July 1, 1984, with an appropriation of $3.7 billion.
For PY 1985, almost $3.8 billion was appropriated.
This provision of forward funding permits effective planning.
While JTPA builds on the experience of past training and employment programs, it represents a substantial departure from earlier approaches.
This is particularly so in terms of the new institutional relationships reflected in the delivery system and in the emphasis on the system's performance in training for jobs in the private sector.
The JTPA allows private and public partnerships to make fundamental decisions on howto administer JTPA funds and on the types and mix of services to be provided.
The JTPA establishes a public/private partnership between government and the private sector by providing a major role for business in the direction and operation of JTPA programs.
The JTPA shifts primary responsibility and authority for the design and administration of the delivery system from the Federal Government to the Governors and the States.
Title II provides for a system of block grants to States to support local training and employment programs for the economically disadvantaged.
States are responsible for further allocating the funds to service delivery areas in their States and for overseeing the planning and operation of local programs.
Part B of this title also provides for a summer youth employment and training program.
Title III of JTPA provides for a new program targeted on dislocated workers—experienced workers displaced from their regular employment by plant closings, technological change, foreign competition or other major economic disturbances.
Title IV provides for limited activities to be continued under Federal direction such as those that involve interstate activities or that are special responsibilities of the Federal Government.
These include the Job Corps, Indian and Native American programs, Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker programs, and such support activities as evaluation and technical assistance.
Title II-A provides for a system of block grants to States based on relative unemployment and number of disadvantaged persons.
The Governor makes further allocations to designated service delivery areas (SDA's), which generally are communities of at least 200,000 population or areas determined by the Governor.
In PY 1984, 592 SDA's received a total of $1.9 million for title II-A activities.
During PY 1984, the JTPA served over 856,400 persons in the basic title II-A State and local programs.
In terms of activity, 41 percent of enrollees were assigned to classroom training, 21 percent to on-the-job training, 20 percent to job search assistance activities, and 18 percent to other activities.
During PY 1984, expenditures for training accounted for 74 percent of the total expenditures.
Data from the first full PY indicate that, of new participants entering JTPA, 94 percent were economically disadvantaged (the statute requires that 90 percent of those served must be economically disadvantaged).
Youth 21 years of age and under accounted for 42 percent of all participants.
Twenty-seven percent of the enrollees were school dropouts and 44 percent were receiving some form of public assistance.
Over 562,200 participants were terminated from title II-A programs during PY 1984.
Of this number, an estimated 61 percent entered employment at the time of termination.
The highest entered employment rate was for participants in on-the-job training with 78 percent becoming employed.
Other entered employment rates by program activity were: Job search assistance, 77 percent; classroom training, 57 percent; and work experience, 43 percent.
For participants entering employment, the average hourly wage was $4.49.
Title III of JTPA represents recognition of a problem of increasing concern in recent years—the plight of experienced workers who find themselves displaced through economic or technological change.
Congress made available funds to initiate dislocated worker employment and training programs prior to the effective date of the basic JTPA.
Thus, a special Emergency Jobs Bill made possible immediate operation of programs for dislocated workers in early 1983.
For PY 1984, $223 million was appropriated.
Seventy-five percent of the funds were allocated to the States for distribution by the Governors to address problems of dislocated workers within their States.
The remaining 25 percent was reserved for distribution by the Secretary to the States to address special problems and needs.
A total of $222.5 million has been appropriated for PY 1985.
Of this amount, $167.25 million has been allocated to the States by formula for distribution by the Governors.
The remaining $55.25 million is reserved for distribution by the Secretary to the States to address special problems and needs.
With certain exceptions, where unemployment exceeds the national average, States are required to match the Federal grant with non-Federal contributions.
Dislocated worker programs are designed to provide on-thejob training, classroom training, job placement, and other necessary support services to enable dislocated workers to find new jobs, primarily in the private sector.
Services may also be provided before lay-off when there is notice of plant closing.
Total enrollments under title III from July 1, 1984 through June 30, 1985, (the end of the first PY), numbered 178,000.
Of 112,675 participants that terminated from the program, 66 percent entered employment.
Data on the characteristics of the terminees indicate that 88 percent of the participants were unemployed at the time of enrollment and 50 percent were receiving unemployment compensation.
Title II-B provides for a Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP).
This program gives economically disadvantaged youth employment opportunities and related training and educational services during the summer months.
States and local service delivery areas received a total of $824.6 million for the summer of 1984 and provided over 753,000 summer jobs for disadvantaged youth.
The Job Corps, authorized by title IV, provides a wide range of training, education, and support services, primarily in residential centers, for disadvantaged youth ages 16 to 21.
During PY 1984 (July 1984–June 1985) the Job Corps operated 107 training centers at a cost of $587 million.
The program is being funded at $617 million for PY 1985.
These centers provided 39,141 service years and served approximately 57,400 new enrollees during PY 1984.
During this period, ETA implemented a pilot project to provide services to 22 to 24-year-olds at Job Corps centers; initiated a computer assisted instruction program; and tested several innovative education programs.
These projects are scheduled to be evaluated during PY 1985 to determine their overall effectiveness.
In addition, final decisions were made on changes in vocational offerings at centers, and refinements were made to competency based vocational curricula.
The Job Corps management information system was enhanced, and advanced career training programs were implemented at a number of centers.
The majority of Job Corps centers are 100 percent residential, but a number of centers have combined residential/nonresidential programs/Nonresidential enrollment during PY 1984 was 9.5 percent of the total.
Under title IV of JTPA, ETA continued to have responsibility for administering several national programs serving groups that the legislation identified as in need of special services because of the particular disadvantages they encounter in the labor market.
Under JTPA, the Indian and Native American Employment and Training Program continued to support a wide variety of training and employment services through grants to Indian Tribes, other Native American communities and various related organizations.
During PY 1984, approximately 26,500 Indians and Native Americans were served at a cost of $62.2 million; PY 1985 funding is at the $62.2 million level.
In terms of services, 31 percent received classroom training, 9 percent received on-the-job training, 30 percent were in work experience or community service employment, 1 percent were in tryout employment and 29 percent received various supportive services.
The Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Program provides services to migrants and seasonal farmworkers, ranging from job training to emergency assistance, health and medical care, and nutritional services.
During PY 1984, the program served 52,880 persons at a cost of $65.5 million level.
Over 8,400 received classroom training, 6,000 were placed in on-the-job training and 1,400 were placed in work experience positions.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP), authorized by title V of the Older Americans Act, provides subsidized part-time jobs in community service activities for lowincome persons 55 or older.
Grants are given to State and national organizations to develop part-time jobs which typically are for an average of 20 hours per week and are located in such facilities as hospitals, senior citizens centers, schools, and other public institutions.
In PY 1984 the SCSEP provided employment for over 63,000 older persons through an appropriation of $326 million.
Among ETA's major responsibilities is the promotion and fostering of an effective national apprenticeship system.
This activity is carried out in cooperation with State apprenticeship agencies by providing technical assistance and advisory services to employers, employer associations and labor organizations.
Duringfiscal 1985, over 328,000 apprentices received training and over 94,000 new apprentices entered training.
Female apprentices accounted for 7 percent of the total and 19 percent were members of minority groups.
For several years, ETA has made special efforts, in cooperation with the Defense Department, to develop and expand apprenticeship in the Armed Services.
In fiscal 1985, approxmately 50,000 uniformed personnel were enrolled in apprenticeship programs conducted by the Army, Navy, and the Marine Corps.
The Defense Department also sponsors apprenticeship programs for its civilian employees.
During the year, there were over 50,000 apprenticeship programs registered with ETA or the 31 State apprenticeship agencies, including over 2,500 new programs developed during the year.
During the period, Federal staff conducted 1,600 compliance reviews of apprenticeship programs to assure compliance with the provisions of equal employment opportunity in apprenticeship regulations.
Efforts to improve the quality and effectiveness of apprenticeship programs were continued during the year.
Over 1,800 quality assessments were made.
Based on the results of these assessments, apprenticeship field staff assisted program sponsors in implementing such quality improvements as performance based training, revised and updated work processes, and improved related instructions.
The public employment service is a nationwide system providing services to individuals seeking employment and to employers seeking workers.
The basic labor exchange system of the employment service provides job findings and placement service to job seekers and recruitment and referral service to employers with job vacancies.
The system also facilitates the match of job seekers and employers within and among the States and performs basic work test activities for the States'unemployment compensation systems.
The 1982 amendments to the Wagner-Peyser Act significantly expanded the role of the States in the planning and administration of the employment service system and changed the funding methodology for employment service activities.
The activities are financed through basic allotments to States and funds are distributed under a demographically based formula using civilian labor force and unemployment criteria.
The amendments (title V, Job Training Partnership Act P.L. 97-300) provided for transition from a fiscal year basis (October 1 through September 30) to a program year (PY) (July 1 through June 30) for State public employment service activities.
During PY 1984 the conversion, and related procedural and administrative adjustments, were institutionalized.
During the year, work continued on updating the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT), a basic reference for many employers, schools, and other personnel-related activities.
Emphasis is on defining and analyzing occupations in high technology industries and on occupations impacted by technological change.
The employment service continued to have special responsibilities for administering the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program.
TJTC is an elective income tax credit that can be applied to the wages private employers pay to new employees in certain target groups.
Employers hiring a member of the specified groups must obtain certification from a public employment service office in order to qualify for the credit.
During the first three quarters of fiscal 1985 public employment service offices issued 442,000 certifications, an increase of 11.5 percent over the same period in fiscal 1984.
The program, originally scheduled to expire at the end of 1984, has been extended through December 1985, by the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984.
The U.S. Employment Service and its affiliated State agencies administer a labor certification program required by the Immigration and Nationality Act.
In fiscal 1984, approximately 31,000 applications for permanent and temporary labor certifications were processed with 25,000 applications certified for approval.
In calendar year 1984, approximately 20,000 applications for jobs in temporary agricultural work, to be filled by foreign workers, were certified.
The Employers'National Job Service Committee (ENJSC) and more than 1,200 affiliated Job Service Employer Committees (JSEC) provided private sector leadership to assist the public employment service in establishing the new relationships authorized by JTPA.
Over 20,000 employers participate in this volunteer program to improve services to employers and applicants by the State public employment service agencies.
The JTPA authorizes a nationwide computerized job bank program.
The Interstate Job Bank computer tape-to-tape exchange of job opening information has grown rapidly to include approximately 9,800 job openings each week, with a turnover of about 10 percent weekly.
The openings listed are those submitted by States as hard-to-fill locally, and are forwarded to over 20,000 locations each week for reference and applicant referral.
During PY 1984 improved methods of transmitting the listings were piloted and revised ways to track and feedback results of referred resumes showed promise for further enhancements to provide easier participation by States.
The new Validity Generalization (VG) testing for identifying applicants' aptitudes for referral to employers has been recognized by many employers.
Multiplant employers are urging State public employment services to adopt this method.
Consequently, about half of the States are at present using this new technique in some form and in at least part of the States.
Other States have indicated during PY 1984 their intentions to introduce in PY 1985 the VG method of General Occupational Aptitude testing for virtually all jobs.
The Work Incentive (WIN) Program provides training and employment services to applicants/recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC).
WIN is administered jointly by the Department of Labor and the Department of Health and Human Service (HHS).
However, under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, States were given the option of conducting a demonstration program under which the WIN program could be administered solely by State welfare agencies under the direction of HHS.
Some 23 States have elected to operate WIN demonstration programs.
Participants in WIN are from groups that experience particular disadvantages in the labor market.
In the first three quarters of fiscal 1985, 80 percent of WIN participants were women; 60 percent were minorities; and 56 percent had less than a high school education.
During the first three quarters of fiscal 1985, regular WIN programs in the 31 States remaining under joint DOL/HHS administration registered nearly 246,500 persons and assisted nearly 85,000 registrants to enter unsubsidized employment.
Of those placed in jobs, about half earned enough at entry to leave the AFDC rolls; the remainder continued to receive assistance but at a reduced level.
For the 31 States under the joint program, reduction in welfare grants as a result of the WIN program, amounted to $179.5 million for the 9-month period.
This estimate does not include savings from reduction in food stamps or medicaid.
Fiscal 1985 saw a continuation of the fiscal 1984 decline in unemployment compensation claims and a major improvement in the solvency of the State unemployment compensation programs.
During calendar year 1984, 19.6 million initial claims for unemployment benefits were filed with State Employment Security Agencies (SESA's), compared to 22.8 millión initial claims filed in calendar year 1983, and 30.3 million in calendar year 1982.
Weeks of unemployment compensated (weekly benefit payments) declined in calendar year 1984 to 103.6 million weeks of total unemployment compared to 145 million in calendar year 1983; and weeks of partial unemployment declined to 8.6 million compared to 10.3 million in calendar year 1983.
Legislative action during fiscal 1985 was limited to an amendment to the Federal Supplemental Compensation (FSC) Act, expiring in March 1985, to provide eligibility for claimants in active status to be extended for continuous weeks of unemployment until any previously established entitlement had been exhausted.
This action concluded the FSC program, which had been initiated in September 1982, and revised and extended on 5 separate occasions.
The FSC action concluded a 4-year period of executivecongressional legislative activity in the Federal-State Unemployment Insurance Program.
Comprehensive improvements in Federal and State financing of the costs of the system to ensure its continuing solvency.
Reform of the Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act.
Reform of the program of Unemployment Compensation for Ex-Servicemembers.
Reform and restructuring of the program of Trade Adjustment Assistance, including a 2-year extension until September 30, 1985.
Reduction of income thresholds for the application of income taxing on part of unemployment compensation benefit payments.
Requiring that each State maintain a system of employer reports of wages paid to workers to be used as a source of information for assuring the validity of payments in Federally assisted benefit programs, including unemployment compensation.
Encouraging and assisting States in the development of plans for short-time compensation (worksharing).
Improvement was reflected during fiscal 1985 in State benefit financing and repayment of loans from the Federal Unemployment Trust Fund (FUTA).
These loans had peaked as of January 31, 1984, when 26 States had outstanding loans in an aggregate total amount of $14 billion.
By the end of fiscal 1984, the number of States had been reduced to 20 and the total amount of outstanding loans to $9.7 billion (of which $5.9 billion were interest free taken out before April 1, 1982—and $3.8 billion subject to interest).
During fiscal 1985, declining rates of unemployment and improved financing structures combined to permit many States to make voluntary loan repayments, in lieu of or in addition to recoveries occurring by way of reduced FUTA offset credit to employers in debtor States.
Five States repaid their outstanding loans in full, reducing the number of States with unpaid loans to 15 as of August 31, 1985.
The balance of outstanding loans was similarly reduced, to $6.2 billion by the same date ($4.8 billion interest free and $1.4 billion interest bearing).
Monthly borrowings during fiscal 1985 ranged from a high of $542.9 million in March 1985 to a low of $76.8 million in August 1985.
Positive balances of the 38 States not in debtor status as of August 31, 1985, aggregated to $5.0 billion.
While weekly layoff payments under the Redwood Employee Protection Program ended at the end of fiscal 1984, an exception is provided for older workers: affected workers who have reached age 60 prior to October 1, 1984.
For any such worker, entitlement continues until age 65.
Preliminary data for fiscal 1985 indicates that during the year affected workers were paid benefits for 11,606 weeks for a total of $3.0 million—an average payment of $258.
Severance payments, in lieu of entitlement to weekly payments, were made to 37 workers.
Since its inception in May 1977, $96.9 million has been paid to affected workers in weekly layoff benefits and severance payments.
Under the Disaster Unemployment Assistance Program (DUA), during fiscal 1985, 18 major disasters were declared in 15 States.
Some 13,000 individuals received DUA benefits during the 10-month period ending July 31, 1985.
Benefits totaled $5.0 million, down from $15.0 million in the same period of fiscal 1984.
The integrity of the unemployment compensation program continues to receive high priority by the Department of Labor and the SESA's under the Administration's efforts aimed at the reduction of fraud, waste and abuse in all income maintenances program.
Certain of the data in this section is the latest available information and is not necessarily within the limits of fiscal 1985.)
During fiscal 1982, 1983, and 1984, additional funds were made available to implement or enhance the automated systems used by SESA's to detect and recover benefit overpayment.
The result of this investment for the first 2 fiscal years has shown a significant increase in the amount of benefit overpayments detected and recovered in most SESA's.
Although data is not yet available to measure the effect of the fiscal 1984 additional funds for the model systems, it is expected that a similar trend will be realized.
Programwide, in fiscal 1984, both detection and recovery of benefit overpayments increased over prior levels.
During fiscal 1984, a pilot test of an unemployment compensation model prosecution program began in Philadelphia and the State of Arizona.
This 2- year project is being conducted to determine whether the model approach is an effective, cost-beneficial tool for SESA's to use under State laws to deal with unemployment compensation fraud and whether funding an organized and specific effort results in increased convictions and restitution of benefit funds.
The development of a comprehensive internal security program in unemployment compensation operations continues to receive attention.
Risk analyses have been completed in 45 SESA's, and the remaining SESA's plan on completing a risk analysis in fiscal 1986.
These analyses identify unemployment compensation program vulnerabilities and establish safeguards to eliminate or reduce the vulnerabilities identified.
A comprehensive training program for SESA's staff has been developed with training in internal investigative techniques, fraud and financial management, and computer fraud.
New initiatives for fiscal 1986 will be directed to implementing a revised internal security reporting system and to conducting on-site monitoring of the SESA's unemployment compensation internal security programs.
Continued emphasis was placed on increasing the degree of automation of SESA benefit payment, tax and payment control functions.
This effort will improve the efficiency of the unemployment compensation system, reduce the level of fraud and abuse, and assist in the collection of revenues and overpayment.
During fiscal 1985, $20 million was awarded to 27 SESA's to fund unemployment compensation automation projects.
These projects were for replacement of obsolete hardware and software.
In fiscal 1986, additional automation grants will be awarded to SESA's to improve the automation capabilities of their unemployment compensation programs.
The Secretary of Labor has directed the Department to engage in a wide-ranging policy review to develop an assessment system designed to improve the accuracy and timeliness of unemployment compensation revenue and payment activities.
Plans call for implementation of the proposed Quality Control design or a modified assessment system at the completion of this review.
The purpose of this review was to explore the basic policy decisions forming the frame work of such a system and to ensure the full participation of the many groups involved in unemployment compensation administration in this process.
The review solicited viewpoints, suggestions and alternative approaches from Governors, employers, organized labor and other interested groups.
The assessment system will improve the accuracy and timeliness of unemployment compensation revenue and payment activities.
Experience gained through the Random Audit program and other available information indicates that substantial dollar losses from the Unemployment Compensation Trust Fund have occurred through (1) the overpayment of unemployment compensation benefits, (2) undercollection of employer unemployment compensation'taxes, and (3) lost interest on revenues.
The Random Audit program has provided preliminary data on the size of the benefit overpayment problem.
Under this voluntary program, 46 States have selected a small sample of intrastate claims paid each week and determined through field investigation the accuracy of the payment.
The results show that on a nationwide basis, a substantial amount of unemployment compensation benefits may be paid in error.
Such error rates are ten times greater than previously believed based on standard reporting and represent substantial sums in a multibillion dollar program such as unemployment compensation.
Although only partial data is available on the magnitude of the revenue problem, estimated revenue losses due to delinquent employer taxes may be considerable.
Reports issued by the Office of the Inspector General estimate that lost interest on revenues due to untimely deposit of employer taxes and early withdrawal of benefit funds add additional millions of dollars to this level.
An assessment system to improve the accuracy and timeliness of unemployment compensation revenue and payment activities will give the Department the means to deal effectively with unemployment compensation program performance and quality issues.
It will establish a means for the Secretary to carry out his oversight responsibilities.
Under the Trade Act of 1974, ETA conducts fact finding investigations on worker petitions for trade adjustment assistance (TAA) benefits.
Trade-impacted workers certified as eligible to apply for TAA may receive additional weeks of unemployment benefits, training, counseling, job search and relocation payments.
The TAA provisions were extended through September 30, 1985, by the International Coffee Agreement Amendments Act of 1983, and through November 14, 1985, by the Emergency Extension Act of 1985.
The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 further amended the Trade Act, effective July 18, 1984, by increasing the maximum amount for job search and relocation allowances from $600 to $800, and by allowing for workers whose entry into training was delayed for administrative reasons to collect 26 additional weeks of trade readjustment allowances (TRA).
Eight hundred and forty-six (846) new worker TAA petitions were filed with the Department during fiscal 1985, an increase of 68 percent over the previous fiscal year figure.
In fiscal 1985, about 58,100 workers were certified as eligible to receive TAA benefits, with the majority of workers located in the apparel, footwear, and textile industries, compared to 13,500 workers mostly in the steel, footwear, and electronics industries in the previous fiscal year.
TAA data for the first 9 months of fiscal 1985 show that 11,531 workers adversely affected by imports received trade readjustment allowances (TRA) first payments.
A total of $22.66 million was paid in TRA benefits during the same period.
In addition, 596 workers received a total of $138,000 in job search allowances, and 793 workers received a total of $1.05 million in relocation allowances.
A basic objective of ETA is the resolution of all outstanding audits and the timely processing of contract and grant closeout actions.
During fiscal 1985, ETA issued final determinations for approximately 450 audits.
Included in this activity were the first comprehensive audits of unemployment compensation grants in the program's history.
At the end of fiscal 1985, the phasedown and closeout of the CETA program is 95 percent complete.
All but three of the remaining master plans and annual plan subparts are awaiting the outcome of administrative appeals.
The closeouts of the remaining three are delayed by other administrative problems.
Approximately 400 contracts and grants funded by the national office were closed during fiscal 1985.
Nearly 650 additional closeout actions remain pending for reasons such as appeals of contract or grant officer determinations, unresolved audit issues, pending debt collection actions and pending establishment of the indirect rate.
Implementing guidelines have been developed and distributed relating to the resolution of JTPA audits and the continuation of closeout activity, most of which has been centralized in the ETA national office.
During fiscal 1985 ETA collected approximately $24 million of the debt established through the audit resolution process.
More than $18 million of this amount was in cash collections.
Also, more than $12 million of debt was referred to the Department of Justice and the General Accounting Office for litigation or termination.
Over 500 preaward reviews were completed on potential ETA contractors or grantees.
Twenty on-site investigations were conducted to determine whether the grantees/contractors were in compliance with the legislative and regulatory requirements applicable to them.
And, over 300 incidents of alleged fraud, abuse, or other criminal activity were reported through the ETA Incident Report system or the GAO/OIG Hotline system.
Corrective action was initiated where appropriate.
In an effort to strengthen the integrity of ETA programs, onsite reviews were conducted independent of program office activities on a sample of 21 national office programs.
These reviews focused on program operations and financial systems.
The primary issues identified during these reviews were misclassification of costs, lack of cost allocation plans, inadequate documentation for verification of participant eligibility and failure to follow government travel regulations.
The appropriate program office initiated requests for corrective action where necessary.
In fiscal 1985, the policy and planning activities focused on the identification of emerging issues as the new JTPA training and employment system matured, and support of ETA's legislative responsibilities.
Although JTPA proved successful overall, during the first 2 years a number of issues surfaced which indicated the need for closer examination.
These issues were the subjects of a number of policy papers including: studies of program data and evaluation findings to determine the extent to which the program is serving its intended target group; reviews of evaluation studies to assess the extent and potential for further coordination of training and employment programs with related programs at the State and local level; and studies of the extent and adequacy of services to youth under the new system.
Other analyses included a review of the Trade Adjustment Assistance program in preparation for Congressional oversight hearings on the impact of trade and potential forms of assistance for workers in the steel and copper industries; and several analyses of foreign programs and strategies for addressing unemployment.
Planning and policy staff implemented and coordinated a system of goals and objectives to focus ETA's efforts on areas of highest priority.
Major goals included development of systems to administer JTPA and efforts to assure the integrity of ETA efforts.
Staff also prepared the annual Employment and Training Report of the Secretary for submission to Congress.
ETA's regulatory activities including preparation of the Annual Regulatory Plan and the Semi-Annual Regulatory Agenda received direction and guidance from the policy and planning unit.
Also all ETA proposed regulations were reviewed for consistency with the law and administration policy.
ETA participated in congressional oversight hearings on the Job Training Partnership Act, the Job Corps, Trade Adjustment Assistance, and displaced older workers.
Work continued on ETA studies which provided the basis for briefs and reports in accordance with DOL's oversight responsibilities.
The second phase report of a 2-year, 3-phase process study on JTPA implementation indicated that JTPA is proceeding as anticipated according to the legislation.
Data from the Job Training Longitudinal Survey (JTLS), which is the primary vehicle for measuring the impact of the Act, showed that JTPA continues to serve the intended clientele (over 90 percent economically disadvantaged in title Ⅱ-A), with the intended service (training).
In addition, ETA reported that the first phase of a two-phase study of the early implementation and effects of the JTPA Wagner-Peyser amendments revealed that in most States the amendments have not yet had a major impact on ES-JTPA relationships.
At the same time, ETA adhered to its long standing commitment to research basic labor market issues.
ETA continued, for instance, to track the working life of various demographic groups through the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS), a survey begun in 1966.
In addition, nationally administered pilot, demonstration, and multi-State programs provided training and other employment related services to special-needs groups, such as the handicapped, youth, and persons of limited English-speaking ability.
The issuance of an updated performance standards adjustment model for adult and youth programs and the continued assessment of JTPA implementation and impact were important fiscal 1985 activities.
Performance standards for title II, III, and Job Corps remained unchanged, with an emphasis on the refinement and updating of adjustment models to assist States in setting State and local standards.
ETA also continued to provide ongoing training and technical assistance through various technical assistance guides and customized training for State and local staff operating title ⅡI programs.
Revision of an optional methodology to assist Governors in adjusting local standards.
Development of adjustment models for Job Corps Center standards.
Development of a pilot adjustment model for Indian program standards.
During fiscal 1985, research was undertaken to identify additional performance measures for youth, welfare reduction and postprogram measures for programs serving adults, welfare recipients and dislocated workers.
JTPA provides for concurrent oversight activities initiated by local, State, and Federal entities in the job training system.
The exercise of oversight responsibilities at the local, State, and Federal levels assesses how the system is performing and the extent to which it complies with the statutory requirements (i.e., compliance reviews).
The major emphasis of ETA oversight is to review the development and effectiveness of State systems to plan, manage, direct and assess programs within the State.
A sample of SDA's are also reviewed to determine whether State systems are functioning as intended.
ETA's oversight strategy includes special studies and impact evaluation mandated by Section 454 of JTPA as well as analysis of a limited number of reported items for the States.
Surveys will be conducted as needed.
The ETA regional offices have primary responsibility for conducting JTPA onsite compliance reviews in States.
Exchange.
In PY 1984, regional office staff conducted 1,400 reviews in 18 separate elements under the core system reflecting key requirements in JTPA.
Compliance reviews are conducted using ETA developed compliance review guides and are generally scheduled on an annual basis.
Review findings are forwarded to the Grant Officer and a copy is provided to the State.
If compliance issues are found during a review a recommendation is made that the State take the actions necessary to assure compliance with Federal requirements.
States have the responsibility for determining the substance of corrective actions.
ETA has implemented its plans for compliance review in PY 1985.
ETA will continue to conduct reviews under the three core systems using the same basic framework as in PY 1984.
Most reviews occur between July 1, 1985 and March 30, 1986.
Celebration of the Bureau's centennial year came to a close with two final events: A reception on January 22—jointly sponsored by BLS and the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress—to mark the anniversary of the swearing in of the Bureau's first Commissioner, Carroll D. Wright, in January 1885; and the release of a historical volume, The First Hundred Years of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Secretary Brock hosted a reception for members of the press and the senior staff of the Department to introduce this new book.
Released on Labor Day, it describes the origins not only of the Bureau but of the Department itself.
Beginning as the Bureau of Labor, BLS preceded the Department by nearly three decades.
The history also covers the accomplishments of each of the 10 BLS commissioners so far and reports on the various pressures for change in BLS programs—pressures generated by two world wars, the Great Depression, and recurring recessions— and on political controversies involving the Bureau over the years.
The first year of the Bureau's second century of operation was marked by strong external demand for further program development despite an atmosphere of fiscal restraint prevailing in both the executive and legislative branches of the Government.
Expand its survey of professional, administrative, technical, and clerical (PATC) salaries of workers in white-collar occupations in private industry.
The sample will be enlarged to reflect smaller establishments, more service industries, and State and local governments.
This expansion was recommended by a task force established by the Cabinet Council on Management and Administration.
Its recommendations, approved by the Council and subsequently by the President, are consistent with previous recommendations made in 1975 and 1977 and more recently by the General Accounting Office and the Presidentially appointed Grace Commission.
The PATC expansion is being implemented in stages over 3 years, at first on a reimbursable basis with resources provided through an assessment on other Federal agencies—until Congress appropriates the required funds.
Prepare to implement a new revision of the Standard Industrial Classification System.
The last complete revision of the governmentwide coding system was in 1972.
Plans for a substantial revision in 1982 were foregone because of budgetary considerations.
Unwilling to wait longer, OMB reactivated the revision process this year and scheduled it for implementation in fiscal year 1987.
During this year, BLS not only worked closely with the Technical Committee on Industrial Classification set up by OMB to handle the revision activities but also prepared to participate in this governmentwide revision.
A survey of permanent mass layoffs and plant closings, for which $5 million was added to the Bureau's budget request.
The Bureau conducted pilot tests in eight States this year to determine how to proceed.
Plans call for expansion to all States in the next two years.
Two new uses of the Consumer Price Index developed during this year, both of which served to emphasize even further the need for constant attention to the quality and security of this widely used measure.
Starting in 1985, the Economic Recovery Tax Act, passed in 1981, required adjustments in personal income tax brackets based on changes in the CPI for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) over the two preceding years.
This adjustment is intended to offset the effect of inflation on taxpayer liability, sometimes called bracket creep.
OMB estimated that this adjustment would reduce annual tax revenues in 1986 by about $1.8 billion for each 1-percent increase in the CPI.
Starting in August, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission sanctioned the trading of futures contracts on the CPI for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W).
This trading—authorized in response to a petition from the Coffee, Sugar, and Cocoa Exchange—is intended to enable purchasers to hedge their resources against inflation.
Major improvements were made during the year in several macroeconomic indicators.
The Current Population Survey.
The redesign of the sample— under way for several years—was fully implemented.
It improved both sample efficiency and quality of the data, particularly at the subnational level.
Current Employment Statistics (CES).
Technological advances continued in this joint Federal/State program.
This year these included the completion of tests on computer-assisted data collection and the electronic transmission of data, which further improved response rates.
Controversy developed during the year over the calculation of one of the series in the Current Employment Statistics program—the average hourly earnings (AHE) series for the aerospace industry, which has used the series for some time to escalate contract sales of equipment to the Defense Department and private airlines.
Over the past few years, contract settlements have provided for lump-sum payments to workers in lieu of wage increases.
By definition, such sums were excluded from the AHE series.
The Bureau offered to publish a supplementary series that would include the lump-sum payments.
The States, which collect the data, were instructed to begin collecting this information.
Local area unemployment statistics.
An improved methodology—based on econometric models—for estimating these rates was developed and tested.
The objective was to seek ways to reduce persistent, nonrandom errors that substantially reduce the usefulness of these estimates as an equitable means of allocating Federal funds among States and areas.
The results suggested that it may be possible to develop a new estimating system but that further research was needed.
The Producer Price Index (PPI).
The massive, first-time revision of the series of measures was substantially completed.
Under way for several years, this revision is now yielding data that are of higher quality, improved timeliness, and in greater detail than ever before.
It has both transformed the concept—in line with several outside expert recommendations—from a simple wholesale measure to a state-of-processing set of measures, and greatly extended the product detail from about one-quarter of all mining and manufacturing industries at the 4-digit Standard Industrial Classification level to complete coverage.
The total number of price quotations was increased nearly tenfold—from fewer than 10,000 quotes to 90,000.
The actual number of indexes increased from about 3,000 to about 8,000.
Other improvements that significantly improved the quality of these measures include probability sampling, more consistency in pricing, and the elimination of some double counting.
The expansion of detail for the producer price series was made possible through the development of an integrated computer system that reviews the incoming schedules with an optical scanner prior to data entry and then edits the data after entry through a new system, APPRISE.
This system flags data anomalies for staff review for possible errors right on the computer screen.
This screen editing eliminates shuttling of machine printouts back and forth among offices to seek answers to data problems.
The combination of advance technology and staff creativeness has also resulted in more current PPI data.
For example, the 1-month time lag in the data for refined petroleum products was eliminated.
This improvement required—in addition to the extensive and improved field work to collect the data 1 month sooner— adjustments to the complex seasonal calculations that were affected by the change in months covered and reestimates of the historical series to reflect the new seasonal factors.
The Consumer Price Index.
The multiyear revision program continued on schedule.
The new measure is scheduled for publication with the data for January 1987.
The Consumer Expenditure Survey.
This two-part survey— an interview with a household member and a diary record provides the data from which the market basket for the CPI is drawn.
This year, data from both the diary and interview components were published for 1982-83.
The Occupational Injury and Illness Survey.
A draft of new guidelines designed to improve employer recordkeeping of illnesses and injuries was completed and published in the Federal Register in July.
Many comments were received from both the business and labor communities.
A final decision on the guidelines will be made within the next few months.
In response to Congressional concerns over the quality of the Bureau's occupational injury and illness statistics, including underreporting, the Bureau, through the Department of Labor's Office of Procurement, contracted with the National Academy of Sciences' Committee on National Statistics to set up a panel to study the accuracy and quality of these data and recommend ways to improve both.
In addition, the Bureau has initiated an onsite case study review of employer recordkeeping practices and procedures to identify reporting problems.
Plans call for visits to about 40 establishments.
Data for the service-producing sector.
In July 1985, for the first time, the Bureau provided in its Employment Cost Index (ECI) estimates of quarterly compensation changes for workers in the following service-producing industries: Transportation; public utilities, wholesale and retail trade; finance, insurance, and real estate; and services.
Additional ECI indexes will be introduced over the next 4 years.
Two new productivity indexes for this sector were published.
In the price area, developmental work was undertaken on measurement problems for new producer and international measures.
Collective bargaining settlements.
The Bureau's series on the size of major collective bargaining settlements in State and local governments was expanded to cover bargaining units with 1,000 workers or more, which makes it comparable to the coverage of the Bureau's series on private-sector bargaining units.
Productivity measures.
Output per employee hour measures were completed for additional industries, and multifactor productivity measures for major sectors of the economy were further refined and extended.
Also, work on measures for specific industries such as steel, autos, utilities, and footwear was undertaken.
A multiyear sample expansion in the establishment-based Current Employment Statistics survey was completed.
The expansion was concentrated among small firms in the service-producing sector in order to better reflect the source of the Nation's job growth.
The Bureau continued test and development activities to modernize the establishment survey.
Long-term studies of alternative sample designs and estimation techniques continued, as did research on estimating cell structures for States.
Tests continued on the application of computer-assisted survey techniques toward the goals of improving data quality and timeliness in BLS Federal/State cooperative programs.
A study was undertaken to analyze the administrative process of identifying new business formations—births—through the unemployment insurance system for more rapid inclusion of such establishments in the employment survey so as to better understand their role in the economy.
The development of a microcomputer environment for the local area unemployment statistics program continued.
In coordination with the Bureau of the Census and a consortium of Federal agencies, the redesigned Current Population Survey was fully implemented.
The introduction of a new sample incorporating information from the 1980 Census of Population and new estimation procedures should greatly improve the sample efficiency.
The Bureau continued to meet the labor force data needs of the press, business, academia, Congress, and government agencies.
Analyses issued included the regular monthly summaries of employment and unemployment, as well as the semiannual and annual reporting, and quarterly reports on weekly earnings, women in the labor force, and minorities.
Special analytical projects resulted in 27 Monthly Labor Review articles, reports, and book reviews.
The Bureau published its fourth annual report examining the impact of employment problems on employment and low income as required by the Job Training Partnership Act.
The Bureau designed and conducted, through the Bureau of the Census, a special survey to obtain data on new trends in work schedules.
Data from a special survey on displaced workers were tabulated, analyzed, and disseminated, while steps were taken to repeat the survey in January 1986.
The Bureau completed the second year of cooperative agreements for labor market information statistical programs with 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
The consolidation of technical, funding, and managerial responsibility for the Current Employment Statistics, Occupational Employment Statistics, and Local Area Unemployment Statistics programs has yielded significant improvements in data quality and timeliness.
Special attention is being paid to conformance to BLS technical standards.
The Bureau developed cooperative agreements for fiscal 1986 to include, in addition, provision for the insured employment and wages report program, which will be transferred to the Bureau from the Employment and Training Administration in fiscal 1986.
The Bureau developed industry-occupational employment estimates for manufacturing industries, based on data collected through the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) survey of transportation, communications, public utilities, wholesale and retail trade, education, and State and local governments.
Objectives of the employment and wages program (ES-202) continued to focus on improving the quality and efficiency of the operations of cooperating State agencies.
All agencies are now reporting 4-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) data at the county level.
Timeliness has also improved.
The new countylevel macroedit was implemented as well as a new data base to support the system.
The 1983 Employment and Wages bulletin was issued in addition to news releases on annual average pay for Metropolitan Statistical Areas and by State and industry for 1983 and 1984.
The Employment and Training Administratiori used ES-202 data in their determination of minimum pay for alien farm workers, for setting performance standards under the Job Training Partnership Act, and in job placement centers.
The Health Care Financing Administration continued to use ES-202 data to construct area wage indexes for reimbursing hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, and other types of health facilities.
Employment identification numbers in each State's unemployment insurance name and address files were provided for the first time under the universe maintenance operations program.
In addition, an integrated system of editing and updating the BLS universe file was put in place.
During the year, considerable staff time was expended on the interagency effort to revise the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, which will culminate in the SIC revision in 1987.
The Bureau continued its planning and developmental efforts in the Permanent Mass Layoff and Plant Closing (PMLPC) program, although no progress was made in the first half of fiscal 1985.
Work halted as a result of: (1) Congressional deferral of fiscal 1985 funding until the second quarter of fiscal 1985, and (2) the inclusion of this funding in an Administration recision request.
Congress failed to act upon the request, thereby restoring the availability of the $5 million funding level to the program in April 1985.
During fiscal 1985, five States completed significant developmental work and submitted test data to the Bureau, which are currently being reviewed for quality assurance and the meeting of program specifications and guidelines.
Three States will continue testing and other developmental activities with a target date of midfiscal 1986 for test data submission to BLS.
Cooperative agreements for the development and testing of the Permanent Mass Layoff and Plant Closing program were negotiated and signed with 32 States and the District of Columbia.
Negotiations with the remaining 10 States are continuing.
Cooperative agreements providing for regular, ongoing production of data will be negotiated with the eight pilot States.
The Bureau continued to meet the needs of various segments of the population for local labor force data by providing monthly summaries of employment and unemployment.
Research continued on the development of regression equations to replace the current methodology used in the estimation of local area unemployment statistics.
Results of the research efforts have been provided to State employment security agencies for simulation and further review.
Evaluation of the research has also been solicited from an outside panel of experts.
In the interim, efforts to improve individual components of the current methodology were completed, and research results were delivered to State agencies for additional review, simulation, and comment.
During 1985, the revision of the Consumer Price Index continued on a schedule which will lead to the publication of a revised index for January 1987.
In addition, the rental equivalence method for measuring price change for homeownership was introduced into the CPI for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers.
The revision of the Producer Price Index continued also.
New indexes representing 103 additional industries in the mining and manufacturing sectors of the economy were published, and a program of regular resampling of the revised indexes was begun.
The International Price program continued regular publication of price indexes covering 100 percent of the value of imported and exported products, and the Consumer Expenditure Survey program conducted a major test to improve the responses of its Diary Survey—a survey used to estimate expenditures for small, frequently purchased items.
An initiative was begun for both the International and Producer Price Index programs to expand coverage to the services sector.
Several analyses were completed which suggested an efficient strategy for expanding index coverage.
The Bureau began publication of additional series for serviceproducing industries in the Employment Cost Index (ECI), as part of a governmentwide initiative to provide more data for this increasingly important sector of the economy.
In July 1985, wage and compensation changes for both transportation and public utilities were published for the first time.
Also published for the first time were compensation changes for trade, finance, insurance, and real estate, and for service industries.
Plans were made to begin publishing wage and compensation changes for health services in both the private sector and in State and local governments.
The quality of the Employment Cost Index was enhanced through a sample replacement effort that substantially strengthened the sample in transportation and public utilities, trade, and manufacturing.
An article describing plans to introduce 1980 industrial and occupational employment weights (from the Census of Population and Housing) in June 1986 appeared in the June 1985 Monthly Labor Review.
Work was nearly complete on the first part of a new wage data entry system designed to improve regional office productivity.
The annual survey of Professional, Administrative, Technical, and Clerical Pay (PATC) was delivered on schedule for use in the Federal pay comparability process.
A December 1984 Monthly Labor Review article described how individual pay rates are determined, and many special tabulations were prepared for research purposes at the request of the Office of Personnel Management and the present Administration to improve the PATC survey.
Over the next 3 years, the Bureau will be expanding the survey to include small establishments, service industries not now studied, and State and local governments.
The annual Émployee Benefits Survey (EBS) of paid leave and employee insurance and pension plans in medium and large firms was conducted with expanded inquiry into emerging and rapidly changing provisions and practices.
The benefits survey, done in conjunction with the PATC survey, provides a unique source of comprehensive data on detailed characteristics of employee benefit plans—leave, retirement and capital accumulation, and a variety of insurance—in private industry.
The Bureau published a bulletin including an analysis of benefit trends since 1979, the first survey year.
This program produced three Monthly Labor Review articles during the year—on short-term disability, life insurance for older workers, and income replacement rates in private pension plans.
Area wage surveys in 70 metropolitan areas were conducted under the regular program of occupational wage surveys.
In 24 of the areas studied, information was collected for the first time on the incidence of formal provisions for supplementary unemployment benefits; severance pay; cost-of-living adjustments; and paid leave for personal reasons, jury duty, funerals, and military duty.
In addition, new job descriptions for the occupations of word processor and material handling laborer were introduced into these 24 areas.
Planning was begun for the redesign of the Area Wage Survey program to reflect new area definitions developed by the Office of Management and Budget and employment changes from the 1980 Census of Population and Housing.
Beginning in January 1987, the program will survey 90 areas, instead of 70, to reflect a more representative market basket of labor areas.
The 90 areas will include the 32 largest areas to be surveyed annually, and 58 smaller areas, surveyed biennially.
Under contract to the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), 94 area wage surveys and 4 special industry wage surveys were conducted for use in administering the Service Contract Act.
Also for ESA, analysis of a test survey of wages and employee benefits in construction was completed, and data collection was begun for surveys of forestry and logging in 4 States.
Seven industry wage surveys were conducted this year, in line with a more streamlined program and a previously reduced budget level.
Timeliness of the final reports on the surveys improved dramatically, with publication lags dropping an average of 3 months.
Work on measuring variances of the estimates continued; a formula has been tested on a survey of hotels and motels and will be extended to other industry surveys.
Data collection for the banking industry survey was successfully coordinated with area wage surveys during calendar year 1985 in an attempt to increase operational efficiency; to date, area reports have been issued 1 to 4 months after the survey reference dates.
The Bureau, under contract with the Department of Defense, compiled universes and selected samples for approximately 170 occupational wage surveys in 1985 for the Federal Wage System (FWS).
Data on the size of wage and compensation adjustments in major collective bargaining contract settlements (covering 1,000 or more workers) in private industry were published each quarter.
Similar data were issued semiannually for State and local governments.
With publication of data for 1984 in February 1985, the scope of the government series was expanded from contracts covering 5,000 or more workers to those covering 1,000 or more, matching the scope of the private industry series.
A detailed analysis of negotiated wage and benefit adjustments during 1984 was published for private industry and State and local governments.
The 1985 bargaining calendar was issued, providing data on major contracts scheduled to expire or subject to reopening during the year.
The bargaining calendar was enhanced with the inclusion, for the first time, of data for State and local government bargaining.
An analysis of bargaining activity slated for 1985 was published in the January 1985 Monthly Labor Review.
It examined key bargaining situations scheduled for the year, provided data on wage changes deferred to 1985 from settlements reached in earlier years, and gave information on potential cost-of-living adjustments.
Changes in labor organization membership among employed wage and salary workers between 1980 and 1984 were analyzed in an article in the February 1985 Monthly Labor Review.
Current Wage Developments was published each month.
It highlighted key events in labor-management relations and provided details of wage and benefit changes in individual major bargaining situations.
It also contained monthly statistics on major work stoppages, listings of expiring agreements, and extensive data on changes in employee compensation in the nonagricultural economy.
BLS further strengthened and expanded the program of measurement and analysis of productivity and technology—topics of substantial public interest.
Productivity measures are widely regarded as a major indicator of U.S. economic progress, and the Bureau refined and extended the series of published measures to provide a broader scope of coverage.
The number of industries for which BLS publishes labor productivity measures was expanded.
The Bureau introduced measures for the following industries: Wood kitchen cabinets, internal combustion engines, machine tool accessories, and refrigeration and air-conditioning.
A total of 133 separate productivity measures are now issued for industries in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
In addition, a chartbook on trends in manufacturing containing data on productivity and related economic indicators was published.
The Bureau also made progress in measuring productivity in the government sector.
The productivity measures for the Federal Government were updated to cover fiscal year 1983.
These measures currently cover fiscal years 1967 to 1983 for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies, representing 65 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
In addition, measures for several State and local government activities were updated.
The multifactor productivity measures published for major sectors of the economy advance a major BLS effort to expand official productivity measures to take account of the role of capital equipment in changes in U.S. labor productivity.
First introduced in fiscal 1983, considerable effort has been made over the past year to refine and extend these key measures.
In addition, at the industry level, a bulletin containing revised and updated multifactor measures for steel and autos was prepared, and developmental work on a multifactor measure for the footwear industry was completed.
Studies are under way to assess factors that affect productivity movements, including the impact of research and development expenditures, changes in labor force composition, changes in capacity utilization, changes in factor prices and depreciation schedules, and changes in the relationship of hours worked to hours paid.
In the international area, the Bureau updated trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 12 countries and continued research toward the development of multifactor productivity measures for Germany and Japan.
A paper on alternative measures of capital inputs in Japanese manufacturing was presented at a major conference.
The measures of comparative levels of hourly compensation costs for production workers in 34 countries and 36 manufacturing industries and the series on international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in 10 industrial countries were also updated.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
In response to substantial public interest, the Bureau continued to assess the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years were prepared for four additional major American industries—textiles, paper and paperboard, steel, and motor vehicles.
During fiscal 1985, labor force, economic, and industry and occupational employment projections were prepared for the 1984-95 period.
The 1986-87 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook also was prepared.
An analysis of how changes in occupational structure have affected the earnings distribution of individuals was published in the Monthly Labor Review.
The article, "The Shrinking Middle Class: Myth or Reality?,"addressed public concern about the supposed decline of middle-income earners.
How Workers Get Their Training, Bulletin 2226, was published.
Data in the bulletin presented the proportion of workers by detailed occupation who indicated they needed specific skills or training to obtain their current job.
For those who indicated they needed training, data were provided on the type of training taken.
Several special analyses were completed and published in the Occupational Outlook Quarterly that focused on the relationship of technological change and jobs.
Among these were articles on career opportunities related to lasers, fiber optics, and biotechnology, and the'impact of computer-aided design and office automation on job opportunities.
Articles were also published in the Quarterly that discussed job opportunities in large, fastgrowing service industries, including health services, retail trade, and business services.
The BLS occupational safety and health statistical program includes the Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses, the Supplementary Data System (SDS), the Work Injury Report (WIR) surveys, and injury and illness recordkeeping.
Program activities are conducted through Federal-State cooperation.
Annual survey.
In November 1984, BLS issued a news release on national estimates of incidence rates and numbers of occupational injuries and illnesses by industry for calendar year 1983.
More detailed statistics by industry and size of establishment were published in a bulletin in June 1985.
Occupational fatality estimates and causal characteristics appeared in an article in the September 1985 Monthly Labor Review.
Individual State estimates for 1983 were produced by 39 States.
The occupational injury and illness data were added to the Bureau's LABSTAT data base for easy access for research and analysis.
In February 1985, about 280,000 employers nationwide were mailed survey forms to provide their 1984 data.
Annual survey data have multiple uses: Trend analysis, interindustry comparisons, eligibility for voluntary compliance, inspection scheduling and targeting by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the States, monitoring of State safety and health programs, and public awareness of workplace safety and health.
Supplementary Data System (SDS).
In fiscal 1985, 32 States participated in the SDS, which provides detailed data on the characteristics of work injuries and illnesses based on State workers'compensation records.
Microdata files for 1983, which include records for over 1.2 million cases, are available from the National Technical Information Service (NTIS).
Standard Supplementary Data System tabulations for 1983, showing distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by industry and occupation, are being prepared and will also be available through NTIS.
No data will be available for 1982 or 1984 from either BLS or NTIS but may be available from participating States.
The data identify the nature and source of workplace injuries and illnesses, part(s) of body affected, type of accident or exposure, and other characteristics not available from the annual survey, and are used to focus on special problem areas, such as back injuries.
Work Injury Reports (WIR).
This survey program obtains detailed accident information directly from injured employees.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) use results of work injury studies to evaluate and develop safety standards, compliance strategy, and training programs.
Surveys in progress include warehouse workers, construction laborers, chemical and heat burn injuries, and injuries to workers involved in longshore operations.
Recordkeeping.
The recordkeeping activities associated with the annual survey have largely been focused on the proposed BLS revision of the recordkeeping guidelines in Report 412-3, What Every Employer Needs to Know About OSHA Recordkeeping.
The revision was prompted by the introduction of several changes in the regulations, and in response to OSHA's use of the recordkeeping system for administrative purposes, such as targeting safety inspections in manufacturing industries.
In the revision, the regulatory changes were addressed, several issues on recordability were clarified, and the format was modified to make the information easier to access and comprehend.
Also, an abbreviated set of guidelines was developed for employers with small-sized establishments and employers in low-hazard industries.
The revised guidelines have been made available to the public for comment.
Publication of the approved guidelines is expected in the spring of 1986.
The regional office information staffs reduced their staffing levels by 19 positions.
The sale of BLS publications was discontinued in 7 of the 8 regions as this activity was consolidated in a single location, Chicago.
The practice of issuing periodic regional announcements of new BLS publications was discontinued, regional employment releases were reduced from monthly to quarterly, all announcements and regional office publication of wage survey results were also curtailed, and further progress was made in the handling of telephone inquiries by using more sophisticated and labor-saving telephone equipment.
A major step forward to measure and improve the quality of the Bureau's statistical reporting was taken this year with the establishment of the Consumer Price Index Process Audit Group.
Quality analysts were hired and trained in 1985 and are conducting audits of data collected for the CPI Housing Survey.
The process audit staff will identify systematic errors and develop a data base, the analysis of which will provide independent, statistically valid measures of the quality of the data collected that ultimately will measure the nonsampling error.
Planning for the data collection effort required for the Consumer Price Index Revision was completed.
Major accomplishments included the development of on-the-job training standards and a certification procedure for each employee assigned to data collection.
An orientation manual for field representatives and an annotated companion piece for field supervisors were developed in preparation for the estimated 200 new employees required for the collection effort for the revision program.
A dozen test projects were undertaken by the collection staff to provide empirical data and operational feedback on the utility and cost of new or revised procedures, forms, and collection methodology for pricing surveys on housing, commodities, and services and proposed quality assessment surveys.
Segment refinement for the housing survey was completed on schedule in the 91 new areas, and staff began data collection in scheduled new areas.
The implementation of the fiscal 1985 Permanent Mass Layoff and Plant Closing (PMLPC) program was delayed until April 24 due to a proposed recision.
At the end of May, a PMLPC Cooperative Agreement was sent to the 42 States and the District of Columbia which were not funded by fiscal 1984 money.
Eight pilot States were funded for developmental work in fiscal 1984.)
By the end of August, the BLS regional offices had successfully negotiated developmental agreements with 32 States and the District of Columbia for a total of $4.2 million.
Negotiations continue to bring the remaining 10 States into the program.
During the same time, the regional offices negotiated 53 Labor Market Information Cooperative Agreements which included the Employment and Wages Report (ES-202) for the first time.
Responsibility for the ES-202 program is being transferred to BLS from the Employment and Training Administration beginning in fiscal 1986.)
Due to the use of carryover funds and other sources, in many cases the State funding of the ES-202 program in fiscal 1986 will be at a reduced level from previous years.
Resources.
The transfer of trust funds from the Employment and Training Administration to BLS was completed this year.
In accordance with a Departmental decision, funding responsibilities for four national labor market statistical programs—Current Employment Statistics (CES), Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS), Occupational Employment Statistics (OES), and Insured Employment and Wages are now fully centralized in BLS.
The Bureau's budget now includes $34.7 million in resources transferred in fiscal years 1984 and 1985 to the Bureau's base from trust funds from the Employment and Training Administration's State Unemployment Insurance and Employment Service Operations Account.
In accordance with the requirements of Section 2901 of the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, the Bureau reduced its resource allocations for travel, printing, and consultants.
Security.
Bureau policy has always prohibited unauthorized access to our use of BLS ecónomic indicators prior to their official release as well as unauthorized access to or use of data from identified individual respondents.
The advent of a Consumer Price Index futures market during the past year materially increased the potential economic value of advanced knowledge of unreleased Consumer Price Index figures and, thus, increased the risk of unauthorized access or use of this information.
The Bureau acted in several areas throughout the year to counter these risks, including additional computer-related procedures, introduction of new work area security safeguards, employee confidentiality and security briefings, and the adoption of a policy barring all BLS employees from trading in CPI futures.
The enactment of criminal penalty provisions for unauthorized trading in CPI futures has also been included in the Department of Labor's 1986 legislative program.
Publications.
BLS publications received a total of eight awards for editorial excellence.
The Bureau set up new 24-hour telephone hotlines to provide recorded data on the Consumer Price Index and the Producer Price Index.
Fiscal year 1985 was a continuation of OSHA's policy of cooperation rather than confrontation.
The operation of OSHA's field offices as "full service"offices was one example of this policy.
Full service offices supply a range of safety and health services to employers and employees in their areas.
These services include providing speakers for local events; giving training in a wide variety of safety and health measures; advising and assisting employers in abating hazards; cooperating with local news media outlets to assure the public is informed about OSHA policies, programs, activities, and services; and providing other outreach activities.
The same spirit of cooperation and assistance marked enforcement functions as the agency continued its policy of settling contested actions rather than proceeding to court.
Settlements required that hazards be corrected, reflecting OSHA's concern that safety and health in the workplace be improved as opposed to the collection of large penalties for noncompliance.
Also in enforcement pursuance, the agency began work on special emphasis programs to address safety and health concerns in special areas.
Following an explosion in June 1985 that killed 21 persons, the agency began a special emphasis program in the fireworks manufacturing industry.
Under this program, every fireworks manufacturer with 10 or more employees will receive a comprehensive inspection before the 4th of July 1986.
In another area, the agency began work on a special emphasis program in the chemical industry.
Under a pilot project, several of OSHA's field offices will undertake a limited number of comprehensive evaluations of chemical plant safety.
These evaluations will go beyond a traditional inspection to learn whether there are violations of standards—they will include a comprehensive review of the entire safety and health program and all chemical systems in a particular plant.
If the pilot program is successful, it will be extended in future years.
OSHA's policy of cooperation was also emphasized by considerable activity in the training and education area as well as in programs designed to enhance voluntary efforts to improve safety and health conditions.
OSHA's programs in partnership with the various States operating their own OSHA-approved safety and health programs were further evidence of the success of the cooperative approach.
In fiscal 1985, OSHA conducted a total of 72,400 inspections, the highest total in the past 9 years.
Of these inspections, 72 percent were targeted on high-hazard industries and worksites.
Following the disastrous accidental release of the chemical methyl isocyanate (MIC) in Bhopal, India, OSHA conducted inspections of the sole producer of that chemical in the United States, Union Carbide of Institute, West Virginia, and the four major users of the chemical in Georgia, New York, Louisiana, and Texas.
OSHA issued citations to two firms.
Soon after the leak in Bhopal, India, OSHA officials testified before Congress to provide assurance that OSHA's program contains procedures/policies that can help prevent similar occurrences in the United States.
At year's end, the agency was developing a pilot special emphasis program under which OSHA inspectors will conduct full-scale safety and health evaluations of a limited number of chemical plants, not simply inspections to determine if standards are violated.
As a result of OSHA's emphasis on protection of Federal workers, injury and illness claims dropped from 209,640 in 1980 to 169,180 in 1984, and the growth rate of compensation costs also declined from 1983 to 1984, saving the government an estimated $51 million.
During the year, OSHA continued to develop standards to protect workers against hazards to their safety and health.
A proposed rule on Powered Platforms for Exterior Building Maintenance was published in the Federal Register on January 22, 1985.
This rule would permit additional methods of powered platform engineering than the one OSHA currently requires.
Another rule was proposed for Presence Sensing Device Initiation for Mechanical Power Presses (PSDI).
This "deregulation'would permit, but not require, the use of presence sensing devices to initiate strokes of mechanical power presses.
It is expected that the use of state-of-the-art technology will enhance and achieve productivity gains and cost savings estimated to total over a half billion dollars over the first 10 years.
A Request for Information was published in the Federal Register on April 22, 1985, seeking information on whether current decompression tables relating to construction work in compressed air atmospheres need revision.
Based on the information received, OSHA will decide whether changes to the standard are warranted.
A notice of proposed rulemaking was published on September 16, 1985 for Concrete and Masonry Construction Safety Standards.
With this notice, OSHA proposed to revise the current construction safety standards addressing concrete and masonry construction to correct problems dealing with the hazards of reinforcing steel, concrete placement, equipment, formwork, precast concrete and masonry work.
Drafts also have been completed on two other proposed standards which have been forwarded to OMB for review prior to publication in the Federal Register: Warning Tags, and the Revision of Recordkeeping Requirements for Tests, Inspections, and Maintenance Checks.
In addition, extensive work has been done on several proposed standards which at year's end were undergoing Departmental review: Scaffolds; Fall Protection; Stairways and Ladders; and Personal Protective Equipment (Fall Protection).
In the health area, a proposed standard on formaldehyde was prepared for submission to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
The Court had ordered that the agency "take appropriate further action, looking toward the issuance of a (revised) standard" governing employee exposure to formaldehyde, by October 1, 1985.
Furthermore, OSHA published its determination that a Federal field sanitation standard should not be issued since at least two-thirds of the hired field farm workers who could be covered by a Federal standard are already covered by State regulations.
However, at year's end, that decision was under review by the Secretary of Labor.
OSHA also proposed to amend the labeling provisions of the ethylene oxide standard to avoid conflict with EPA labeling requirements under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA).
And work proceeded toward the promulgation of new or revised occupational health standards for asbestos, benzene, ethylene dibromide, respiratory protection, 1,3 butadiene, and methylenedianiline.
During fiscal 1985, OSHA continued to foster the strong Federal/State relationship established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.
Twenty-five States and territories administer their own OSHA-approved State plans.
Twenty-three of these State plans cover both private and State and local government employment while two, Connecticut and New York, are limited in scope to employees of the State and its political subdivisions.
To further the cooperative effort of the national occupational safety and health program, OSHA officials attended quarterly meetings held by State plan officials to assure the States'continued knowledge of and involvement in policy initiatives and other matters of mutual interest.
Granting final approval to eight additional States—Arizona, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Tennessee, Utah, and Wyoming—bringing the total to 11.
Final approval for the Alaska, Hawaii and Virgin Islands State plans was granted in fiscal 1984.
Final approval is the last step in the State plan approval process and reflects OSHA's judgment that, in actual operation, the State plan is "at least as effective"as the Federal program.
Although authority for concurrent Federal jurisdiction is relinquished with final State plan approval, monitoring of State activities continues.
Certifying the New Mexico State plan, in December 1984, bringing the number of certified State plans to 23.
Certification is a necessary prerequisite, attesting to structural completeness of the State plan, before OSHA can grant final approval to a State program based upon the effectiveness of its actual performance.
Completing the process to revise "fully effective"staffing benchmarks for several States, in accord with the terms of the court order in AFL-CIO v. Marshall (C.A. No. 74-406).
The benchmarks revision process relies on State-specific data.
Accepting one additional State, bringing the total to 22, as a partner in OSHA's Integrated Management Information System, thus assuring the availability of much more comprehensive data on State and Federal performance.
Issuing revised State plan activities measures which set out the criteria upon which State performance is measured.
The revisions are designed to make the measures more comprehensible, and to facilitate comparison of Federal and State data.
Convening a Federal/State task force to revise the State plan monitoring procedures, which are based upon review of Statespecific performance data in comparison to Federal performance data or other relevant criteria.
The monitoring system was implemented in fiscal 1984 with the understanding that it would be revised as a'result of program experience and in response to Agency policy changes.
Implementing a fiscal 1984 directive that revised and clarified the process whereby OSHA reviews and approves State occupational safety and health standards and, in particular, the process for addressing State standards which differ substantively from the comparable OSHA standard.
In keeping with the agency's emphasis on improved communication, OSHA continued to provide services through its consultation program.
The program assists employers in identifying and correcting hazards and in developing effective management systems for preventing workplace hazards.
These services, provided at no cost to the employer, are mainly for smaller employers in more hazardous businesses.
Consultation may cover all or part of the workplace in response to the employer's request.
The service is administered by State government agencies or universities utilizing staff separate from enforcement.
The service is also confidential to the employer, and a request for consultation does not trigger a State or Federal inspection.
While the service is penalty free, the employer is required to take immediate action to eliminate employee exposure to an imminent danger situation and to correct any identified serious hazard within a reasonable time.
During fiscal 1985, OSHA worked toward full program implementation of regulatory changes made the previous year.
Consultants now evaluate what preventive management practices should be in place to cover any hazards they identify.
Consultants encourage employers to request a comprehensive review of their safety and health program as well as a hazard survey.
Employers who are interested and can qualify for a 1-year exemption from OSHA general schedule inspections are encouraged and assisted in pursuing the program.
In addition, consultants provide training to employers and employees and limited off-site assistance.
The central purpose of these new consultant activities is the prevention of workplace injuries and illnesses by assisting employers to establish effective workplace safety and health programs.
Since these program changes amount to a major expansion of the role of consultants, continuing policy direction and training are necessary to ensure that the expanded services are available to all employers.
During fiscal 1985 a training package was developed to help consultants identify training needs and the best approaches to providing informal training.
In addition, policy directives were finalized on safety and health program assistance, the inspection exemption program, and training by consultants.
Refresher training on all aspects of the expanded consultant role is planned for next year.
Furthermore, during fiscal 1985, OSHA provided 1-year exemptions totalling 277 from scheduled inspections.
These were granted to smaller employers who had received a comprehensive consultation hazard survey, had corrected all hazards identified, and had demonstrated that an effective safety and health program was in operation.
Consultants are also participating in an OSHA national emphasis program in the fireworks manufacturing industry by promoting their services to these employers, with emphasis on assistance in developing effective hazard prevention systems.
In another important area, OSHA is increasing its promotion of Voluntary Protection Programs to companies that are fully committed to employee safety and health and are incorporating these objectives in the daily operation of their workplaces.
General Industry participants in the program have reduced their lost workday cases on average to approximately one-fifth of the rates expected for their industries.
In addition, participants in the programs report improved morale and productivity as well.
There were 15 additional worksites approved during the year.
These initiatives are 'encouraging employers and employees in their efforts to reduce...hazards...and to stimulate...programs for providing safe and healthful working conditions..."as directed by section (2)(b)(1) of the OSHAct.
They afford OSHA an opportunity to exert a positive leadership role in addition to its primary duty of enforcing compulsory standards.
The fiscal year 1985 enrollment at the OSHA Training Institute for compliance officers, State personnel, Federal safety and health representatives from other agencies, and the private sector was approximately 7,100.
The safety and health training offered at the Institute is an important part of OSHA's efforts to use all of its resources to help employers and employees eliminate occupational safety and health hazards.
The Institute offered 57 courses, of which 15 were conducted at sites away from the Institute so that actual worksite situations could be experienced.
Six different courses were offered for private sector personnel, including one on safety and health for the maritime industry, two for construction, and three courses for general industry.
More sessions of these courses were held than in previous years, thereby increasing private sector participation in safety and health training provided by OSHA.
During fiscal 1985, OSHA initiated a policy of charging tuition to private sector students attending Training Institute courses.
The OSHA Office of Training and Education developed generic training materials on new and revised standards for use by the field.
Train-the-trainer sessions, where trainers were shown how to use the basic program and how to incorporate information on specific standards, were conducted for representatives from each OSHA field office.
In addition, hazard recognition slide/tape programs designed for the small employer were developed.
These slide/tapes covered topics such as confined space entry, welding and cutting, carbon monoxide, and eye injuries.
Seven slide/tape programs were made available to OSHA offices during fiscal 1985.
Three remaining programs will be available during the first quarter of fiscal 1986.
The programs are also available for purchase through the National Audiovisual Center.
During fiscal 1985, OSHA presented its first Project Minerva Seminar.
Project Minerva is a program sponsored by OSHA and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and designed to make managers and future managers aware of the need to integrate safety and health into a firm's management system.
The 1-day seminar was directed towards nonsafety and health managers in middle-sized companies; it stressed the importance of senior management commitment to safety and health.
Also, OSHA, NIOSH, and the Medical College of Wiscon-.
More than 30 occupational health physicians attended.
Also, representatives of the Asbestos Workers'locals from around the country attended OSHA's second "Guide to Voluntary Compliance in the Health Area"to learn about safety and health hazards and compliance in asbestos abatement programs.
Under its New Directions grants program, OSHA awarded $5.6 million to approximately 100 nonprofit groups providing a variety of job safety and health services.
The grants support training and education projects addressing serious problems in construction, manufacturing, and other high hazard occupational and industrial sectors.
The New Directions grants program is designed to provide an organization with the funds it needs to develop its staff, skills, and services as a competent, self-sufficient center for job safety and health.
Grantees usually participate in the program for up to 5 years, with some grantees also being funded for a 1-year planning phase in which the 5-year program is planned and organized.
Completing their program this year were 23 New Directions grantees, most of whom have become competent, self-sufficient centers for job safety and health.
This group consists of 14 labor organizations, five employer associations, three educational institutions, and one other nonprofit organization.
During the fiscal year, the General Accounting Office and the Department of Labor Inspector General issued reports presenting the results of audits of the New Directions Program.
Both reports were favorable and contained no recommendations for program change.
On February 19, 1985, the Supreme Court ruled, in Garcia vs. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority et.
In response to that decision, Secretary Brock offered to provide technical assistance to the States to help them comply with the ruling.
At the end of the fiscal year, the Employment Standard Administration's (ESA) Wage and Hour Division was prepared to make experienced personnel available to States requesting technical assistance.
At the same time, Secretary Brock was working with members of the Congress and representatives of State and local government and unions to bring about a solution to the problem of the State and local governments which would have to pay cash time and one-half rates for overtime work instead of the customary compensatory time off.
During fiscal 1985, ESA's Office of Workers' Compensation Programs continued to emphasize cost reduction, program integrity and the elimination of fraud, waste and mismanagement in its Federal employees' compensation, longshore and harbor workers' compensation, and black lung benefits programs.
Field office management in all three programs was streamlined during the fiscal year, and longstanding backlogs were eliminated in the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) program.
Improved automated data processing systems were developed and tested in the longshore program, and decentralization to improve efficiency continued in the black lung program.
In ESA's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), the largest number of compliance reviews was completed since the program was consolidated in the Department of Labor in fiscal 1978.
The Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) streamlined management of field office operations in each of its programs during fiscal 1985.
In the Division of Federal Employees' Compensation (DFEC), longstanding backlogs were eliminated, field office management roles were redefined, and intensive management training was developed for line supervisors.
In the Longshore program, development and testing of improved automated data processing systems took place during the year.
Also, the Division of Coal Mine Workers’ Compensation (DCMWC) continued to decentralize its claims operations to district offices to improve the quality and timeliness of its case processing.
The Office also continued to emphasize cost-savings, program integrity, and the elimination of fraud, waste and mismanagement.
DFEC continued major efforts to reemploy disabled Federal employees.
Through coordination between OWCP rehabilitation specialists and DFEC claims examiners, rehabilitation saved $8 million in Federal employees' compensation costs.
In the Longshore program, rehabilitation saved $3 million in compensation costs.
In January 1985, the Longshore program published interim regulations implementing the amendments to the Longshore Act, signed by President Reagan on September 28, 1984.
The new law makes important changes in benefit schedules, it permits debarment of medical providers to ensure the integrity of the program, and increases penalties for fraudulent actions.
DFEC collected $12.2 million in third-party payments and overpayments to beneficiaries.
DCMWC recovered over $15.9 million from responsible mine operators and insurance carriers, and from overpaid beneficiaries and medical providers.
Believing that excellent field office management is a key to a good claims operation, DFEC modernized its field management system through a comprehensive training program and a redefinition of roles and functions of managers.
The training course, aimed at claims unit supervisors who have the greatest influence over timeliness of service and quality of claims work, was developed over a 9-month period by a special task force.
It gives supervisors effective techniques for developing subordinate employees, delegating work, monitoring performance and meeting program standards better.
At the same time, DFEC made a sweeping modification of decision-making authority levels in field offices, permitting the delegation of decisions to the supervisory and journeyman claims examiner level.
Assistant Deputy Commissioners were redesignated 'District Directors"to emphasize their mandate to manage subordinate units, maintain effective quality control and pursue program goals.
In a major project to bring its workload current, the Federal Employees' Compensation program resolved 87 percent of cases in the system which were a year or more old, adjudicating over 4,000 of those old cases in the 7 months from January to July.
A new standard for district office performance in 1986 requires that virtually every case be adjudicated in 1 year or less, leaving no backlogs of unresolved claims in the system.
Guaranteed prompt payment of compensation to injured Federal employees, with no interruption of income, became a major goal for the program in 1985, when studies showed that employees waited an average of 3 months to receive their first check after the termination of salary.
Using new automated tracking support, district offices were required to follow each claim form through initial review and processing to payment, and to reduce internal time frames to the minimum.
Federal agencies were notified through the Federal Personnel Manual and in interagency meetings to actively encourage employees to file in anticipation of continuing wage loss.
Evidence requirements for initial compensation payment were redefined to minimize the interruption of income in undisputed claims.
The Department of Agriculture (USDA) entered into a formal agreement to undertake a joint project with the DFEC to bring disabled claimants on the long-term rolls back to gainful employment at lighter duty in the agency.
The Office of Management and Budget granted 500 additional positions for fiscal 1985 and 1986 for this project.
The project is centered largely in the West, and is bringing back large numbers of Forest Service employees who would otherwise have no wage-earning capacity and have been receiving total disability compensation.
The Department of the Army announced the successful completion of the Tobyhanna Depot reemployment project with a lifetime compensation savings of $3.2 million based on reemployment of some workers and election of retirement by some who refused new employment.
The project will be expanded to all Army facilities in 1986.
In fiscal 1985 a major effort for the Longshore Division has been the implementation of the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act Amendments of 1984.
These amendments, effective on September 28, 1984, were the first amendments since 1972 and provided for extensive changes in the statute.
Some of the major provisions of the amendments clarify and limit the Act's jurisdiction, make changes in benefits, establish a method of providing benefits for victims of latent disabilities due to occupational disease, and provide additional safeguards against abuse such as increased penalties for fraud.
During the first 3 months of fiscal 1985, the Division developed regulations implementing the amendments.
The regulations were published, on schedule, as interim final rules on January 3, 1985.
Internal operating procedures and instructions to the affected industries were also developed and issued in fiscal 1985.
Comments on the regulations which were submitted by interested parties were evaluated in fiscal 1985, and final regulations are scheduled for publication in fiscal 1986.
The final stages of development of an automated Case Management System for the Longshore Program were completed during fiscal 1985.
The system is comprised of three major subsystems: (1) The Longshore Case Control Subsystem, which will provide case tracking and transaction record keeping on all lost-time and death claims received by the Longshore District Offices.
It will also furnish the claims processing staff with a means of reviewing each claim as it proceeds through the administrative review and adjudicative process; (2) The Longshore Management Information Subsystem, which will provide workload and management statistical information pertinent to the overall operation of the Longshore program, individual district office effort, and claims examiner effort; and (3) The Longshore Correspondence/Word Processing Subsystem which will generate automatic correspondence to be sent to various parties involved in a specific case.
The system was pilot tested in one of the program's district offices at the end of fiscal 1985, and is scheduled to be operational in all district offices by about mid-fiscal 1986.
The system will assist in more timely case reviews and responses to inquiries as well as more efficient work flow in the district offices.
During fiscal 1985 approximately 41,000 lost-time injury reports were received and processed and 6,700 informal conferences were held.
Approximately 900 new rehabilitation cases were opened and 290 workers were rehabilitated.
Efforts of the technical assistance outreach program have, in fiscal 1985, resulted in compensation payments being paid promptly to claimants by carriers and self-insured employers and an increase in the timely filing of required reports by carriers, selfinsurers and medical providers.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers'Compensation continued the decentralization of the program during fiscal 1985.
Review of diagnostic billings and the adjudication of Certificates of Medical Necessity (CMN's) were transferred from the national office to district offices closer to claimants.
Adjudication of CMN's is used to approve durable medical equipment, including home oxygen, home nursing services, and pulmonary rehabilitation treatment.
The review and processing of medical determination billing prior to authorizing payment serves to improve the quality of the tests, to increase timeliness, and control related costs.
During fiscal 1985, the Division received 6,619 new claims and 3,243 refiled claims.
Decisions were made on 11,614 claims.
At the end of the fiscal year there were 5,195 claims pending an initial decision.
The division also held 1,060 informal conferences and forwarded 8,045 claims to the Office of Administrative Law Judges for formal hearing.
The Office of Administrative Law Judges issued 7,063 dispositions to the Division.
Additional workload included maintenance of approximately 74,000 Medical Benefits Only claims, 90,000 Trust Fund monthly benefits claim, 7,876 claims in interim pay pending final resolution and 3,770 claims in which responsible mine operators were paying monthly benefits.
As a result of debt collection activities, the Black Lung division recovered over $8 million from responsible mine operators, insurance carriers, beneficiaries, and medical providers.
Approximately $591 million was paid in benefits to coal miners, eligible survivors, and medical providers.
Of this amount, approximately $492 million was paid to miners and their survivors as monthly benefit payments.
The OWCP Division of Vocational Rehabilitation continued to increase the quality and timeliness of vocational rehabilitation services during fiscal 1985, thereby assisting many injured workers to become self-supporting and reducing compensation costs.
This year national reemployment programs were implemented with the Departments of Agriculture, Army and Labor to facilitate the return to employment of injured workers under the Federal Employees'Compensation Act.
The Division recruited, selected, and provided training in OWCP policy and procedures to approximately 550 contract rehabilitation couselors.
They provided rehabilitation counseling, guidance, placement and followup services to injured workers.
During the year, 647 injured Federal workers were rehabilitated under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, saving more than $11,800 per worker in compensation costs.
Total savings for the year were $8 million in compensation costs.
Also in fiscal 1985, 295 injured workers in the private sector were rehabilitated under the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, for savings of more than $10,300 per worker in compensation costs.
Total compensation costs saved for the year were $3 million.
During fiscal 1985, OWCP continued its efforts to reduce fraud, waste and mismanagement.
In DFEC, standards for the development and adjudication of claims and effective case management were enforced to assure that claims are processed in a timely manner and in accordance with the laws and regulations.
The investigation of questionable claims by Wage-Hour and OFCCP compliance officers was successful in reducing the number of claimants on the rolls who are no longer eligible for benefits.
Through Memoranda of Agreement with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), OWCP and OPM matched beneficiary rolls to identify additional recipients of prohibited dual benefits, and achieved better mutual procedures for offsetting benefits to collect debts.
Also in DFEC, the first and second lists of excluded medical providers were transmitted to the field offices and disseminated among employing agency offices.
A process was developed of reconciling accounts for the annual charging of benefits costs to the employing agencies, and training in reconciliation was provided to fiscal officers.
DCMWC participated with Social Security Administration and other State and Federal agencies in computer matching to ensure the integrity of monthly benefit payments to black lung beneficiaries.
The Division continued to work closely with the OIG in several regions on active investigations of medical providers and others suspected of fraud by the Division.
DCMWC continued to implement procedures for improving security to minimize fraud within the claims process, as well as to conduct periodic audits to ensure the integrity of the benefit payment system.
Work continued throughout fiscal 1985 on the Federal Employees Compensation Level I automated data processing system.
A contract for this major new system was awarded in fiscal 1984, and an ESA project team was assembled to supervise and review contract deliverables.
Initially, the system will integrate DFEC's payment and case monitoring system; automate various fiscal functions; reduce manual processing of medical payments; and provide automated support for a wide range of claims adjudication, medical services, and rehabilitation activities.
The system will require new organizational patterns, which are being developed through a series of work groups with field office participation.
The Longshore program made progress toward automating its district office operations.
A case management system will provide automated case control, management information, and word processing capability.
The system was pilot tested in a district office in fiscal 1985, and is expected to be operational in fiscal 1986.
Finally, on May 17, 1985, a contract was awarded by the Black Lung program for a new support services package to provide for enhanced data processing, medical bill payments, and other services.
The new system will begin operation in fiscal 1986.
The Garcia Ruling.
On February 19, 1985, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority et.
In deciding this case, the Supreme Court expressly overruled its earlier decision in National League of Cities v. Usery that the minimum wage and overtime pay provisions of the FLSA could not constitutionally be applied to Štate and local government employees who are engaged in traditional governmental functions.
Consequently, the monetary provisions of the FLSA now apply to all State and local government employees, except those employees who are excluded from the definition of “employee"contained in section 3 of the Act, or who are otherwise exempt.
In light of the Garcia ruling, the Secretary of Labor offered to provide technical assistance to the States in complying with the FLSA.
Under this program, the Wage and Hour Division at the end of the fiscal year was prepared to make available experienced personnel to States requesting technical assistance.
Meanwhile, with Wage and Hour enforcement first scheduled to start on October 15, 1985 and then rescheduled by Secretarial order to November 1, the Congress was at work at fiscal year's end on legislative adaption of the Act to apply more smoothly to State and local government requirements.
Timely response to complaints was the cornerstone of the Wage and Hour Division's enforcement strategy during fiscal year 1985.
The division conducted 66,943 compliance actions under the FLSA, of which 49,651 were initiated as a result of complaints from workers or concerned citizens.
The inventory of complaints increased from 21,675 to 25,570.
The FLSA enforcement program disclosed $29.6 million due 166,683 workers as a result of minimum wage violations, and $79.7 million due 268,124 employees as a result of overtime violations.
Employers agreed to pay $18.6 million in unpaid minimum wages to 139,251 workers and $61.5 million to 239,144 employees due overtime pay for a total of $80.1 million in FLSA back wages in fiscal 1985.
The difference between the amount of back wages found due employees and the amount that employers agreed to pay reflects, for the most part, sums involved in pending litigation and the refusal of certain employers to pay back wages in cases the Department deemed unsuitable for litigation.
The FLSA permits individuals to bring private suits to collect back wages, liquidated damages, attorney's fees, and court costs.
The Department's enforcement statistics do not include the back wage amounts recovered in private suits.
The Speçial Targeted Enforcement Program (STEP) is aimed at discouraging employers from employing illegal aliens at less than legal wages.
Because illegal aliens do not file complaints, the Wage and Hour division targets FLSA investigations in industries and localities where aliens have traditionally been found to be employed.
The purpose is to reduce the incentive for hiring those workers who tend to accept employment at less than the minimum wage and/or without proper overtime compensation.
In fiscal 1985, STEP investigations were conducted.
The Wage and Hour Division found 9,836 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA during fiscal 1985.
The division assessed $1,021,603 in child labor civil money penalties against 758 employers who were found to be illegally employing 6,330 minors.
A total of 171 exceptions were filed with'the Wage and Hour Division by employers contending that penalties should not have been assessed and requesting a hearing before an administrative law judge.
The Work Experience and Career Exploration Program (WECEP) for 14- and 15-year-old youths likely to drop out of school was revitalized during fiscal 1984.
This program is operated in conjunction with the U.S. Department of Education and State education departments.
Twenty States and the District of Columbia presently participate in WECEP.
Improvement of existing programs and expansion of programs to other States is anticipated.
Section 14 of the FLSA authorizes the Secretary of Labor, ‘to the extent necessary to prevent curtailment of opportunities for employment,"to provide for the employment of certain categories of workers at wage rates below the statutory minimum wage.
These categories include full-time students employed in retail or service establishments, agriculture, or institutions of higher education; learners; apprentices; handicapped workers and messengers.
Such employment must be authorized under special certificates issued pursuant to the Secretary's regulations.
The division issued 38,200 certificates during fiscal 1985 authorizing the employment of approximately 399,864 workers at less than the minimum wage.
Full-time students and handicapped workers employed by sheltered workshops accounted for, respectively, 49 and 48 percent of the workers employed under certificates.
The Secretary's Advisory Committee on Sheltered Workshops met in August 1985 to consider matters concerning the authorization of special minimum wages for handicapped workers employed by sheltered workshops.
The committee provides advice and recommendations to the Secretary on the administration and enforcement of the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and the Service Contract Act as these laws apply to the employment of handicapped workers by sheltered workshops, hospitals, and institutions.
Section 11(d) of the FLSA authorizes the Secretary of Labor to issue rules which regulate, restrict, or prohibit industrial homework in order to safeguard the Act's minimum wage requirements.
Since the 1940's, homework has been restricted in only seven industries.
The regulations restrict homework to individuals who are handicapped and cannot adjust to factory work or are required to remain at home to care for an invalid.
In October 1981, following an extended period of public hearings and comment, the Secretary removed the restrictions in one of these industries, knitted outerwear.
The Department's action removing the restrictions was challenged in court by the International Ladies'Garment Workers'Union and others.
As a result of a court order, the restrictions were reimposed on May 24, 1984.
After public notice and comment on a further proposal, a final rule was issued, effective on December 5, 1984, which modified the restrictions to allow employers in the knitted outerwear industry to employ homeworkers, provided the employers obtain certificates from the Department of Labor authorizing such employment.
In fiscal year 1985, 52 certificates were issued to employers in the knitted outerwear industry.
Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA), which replaced the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act (FLCRA) in 1983, provides important worker protections to migrant and seasonal agricultural workers, including vehicle safety, housing safety and health requirements, disclosure of wages, hours and working conditions, maintenance of necessary reçords and provision to workers of itemized information concerning pay and withholding.
MSPA covers employees of farm labor contractors, as well as those employed by fixed situs employers such as farmers.
MSPA requires farm labor contractors to register with the Department of Labor and to comply with all the provisions of the Act, unless statutorily exempt.
During fiscal 1985, there were 12,356 registrants (including 9,384 farm labor contractors and 2,972 farm labor contractor employees) who employed approximately 375,535 crew members.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted 4,269 MSPA compliance actions during fiscal 1985 which resulted in civil money penalties totaling $1,423,565 assessed against violators.
In addition, there have been 130 revocations, refusals to issue and refusals to renew farm labor contractor certificates of registration.
MSPA also prohibits a farm labor contractor from knowingly employing illegal aliens.
In enforcing this provision, the Wage and Hour Division works closely with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
In fiscal 1985, 153 farm labor contractors were cited for employing a total of 2,077 illegal alien workers.
A number of investigations which evidenced possible criminal violations of other statutes were referred to the Justice Department in fiscal 1985.
The National Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committee and regional coordination committees, comprised of representatives of the regional and national offices of the Employment Standards Administration, the Employment and Training Administration, and Occupational Safety and Health Administration, continued to coordinate programs and services that have impact on migrant and seasonal agricultural workers.
Government contract enforcement concentrated on complaints alleging violations of the various laws that provide labor standards for employees performing government contract work.
During fiscal 1985, 4,423 investigations were conducted under the Davis-Bacon and Related Act, the Service Contract Act, the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Back wages found due to 48,589 workers under the provisions of these laws totaled $29.9 million.
Employers agreed to pay $21.9 million of these back wage amounts to 43,122 workers.
Additional monies were to be restored upon completion of administrative hearings or litigation action.
Pursuant to the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, 13,497 prevailing wage determinations were issued during the fiscal year.
Of this total, 763 were general determinations, published in the Federal Register, which apply to many construction contracts in a given geographic area, and 12,734 were issued for specific construction projects.
Various alternatives for improving the collection of wage data used in making Davis-Bacon wage determinations continued to be explored.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, on July 5, 1983, largely reversed a District Court ruling which had enjoined certain major provisions of the Department's May 1982 revised Davis-Bacon regulations.
The U.S. Supreme Court denied review of the Appeals Court decision and on December 21, 1984, the District Court issued an order lifting the injunction on several key provisions which had been upheld.
On January 31, 1985, the Department implemented those provisions.
The District Court injunction remains in effect for certain provisions pertaining to the expanded use of 'helpers"on Davis-Bacon projects.
The Department intends to implement the helper provisions in accordance with the court decisions.
When fully implemented, the revised regulations are expecte to result in an annual savings of several hundred million dollars to Federal agencies and contractors.
On January 27, 1984, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia upheld the Department's revised Service Contract Act regulations published October 27, 1983, in a suit filed by the AFL-CIO and individual unions.
The AFL-CIO appealed this ruling and on March 22, 1985, the Appeals Court upheld seven of the eight challenged provisions.
The Appeals Court invalidated one new provision interpreting the geographic scope of the Act's coverage.
The revised regulations are expected to reduce costs on Federal service contracts by over $100 million annually.
On March 25, 1985, President Reagan sent a message to Congress requesting the enactment of the "Youth Employment Opportunity Wage Act of 1985."The proposed legislation was introduced in the House of Representatives as H.R. 1811 and in the Senate as S. 797.
The legislation is designed to increase the employment opportunities for young people by establishing a special minimum wage for them during the summer months.
The bills provide that employers can pay youths under 20 years of age 75 percent of the Federal minimum wage, or $2.50 per hour, whichever is less, during the period from May 1 through September 30.
The bills prohibit the reduction of wages of any youth employed 90 days prior to May 1.
The bills also prohibit any employer from discharging, transferring, or demoting any other employee in order to hire a worker at the youth wage.
The Federal Émployees' Compensation program in fiscal 1984 was directed toward the early return of claimants to suitable employment as the key to its long-term case management.
By fully implementing its case management process, relying on early specialist referral and job search for partially disabled claimants, FEC encouraged agencies to identify and promote job opportunities for recipients.
As a result, several government agencies responded to OWCP outreach programs by entering into agreements to rehabilitate and reemploy their former employees.
The division also negotiated an agreement with the Office of Personnel Management to share in the Federal Personnel Manual issuance series, and to support an advanced training course for agency compensation specialists, in order to speed and improve the presentation of employee claims.
Under a major interagency agreement with the Army Materiel Command, to run until March 1985, the division has been training 9,400 first-line supervisors in compensation claims processing.
The division also assisted the Departments of the Treasury and Agriculture, the Social Security Administration, and other agencies to design national compensation programs which will improve service to employees.
Within the Employment Standards Administration, a Model Compensation Program has been developed to standardize claims processing, including training of regional compensation coordinators and first-line supervisors.
OWCP increased the use of accountability review teams and programwide quality control measures.
District offices are required to demonstrate that they are staffing and performing a wide range of quality control functions, and program performance analyses are provided regularly to district office managers.
Two regions are testing the concept of a decentralized hearing function, with hearing examiners based in the regional city and covering several States, to determine whether timeliness is served by decentralization.
During fiscal 1985, OFCCP completed 5,217 compliance reviews, the largest number completed in any fiscal year since the program was consolidated in fiscal 1979.
The contractors reviewed employed a total of 2,978,205 employees.
In completing a record number of reviews, OFCCP reduced the number of aging compliance reviews over 1 year old to 83 in fiscal 1985.
Complaint cases in inventory at the end of the fiscal year have declined from 3,208 in fiscal 1980 to a current inventory level of 644 in fiscal 1985 (not including cases awaiting administrative or legal decision).
OFCCP conducted 1,003 investigations of discrimination complaints.
Where contractor noncompliance was found, OFCCP entered into 1,158 conciliation agreements and 2,106 letters of commitment.
It recommended enforcement actions, which could result in removal of contractors from eligibility to compete for Federal contracts, against 25 firms.
Of the agreements obtained in fiscal 1985, 396 were cash benefit or other financial agrcements in which contractors committed a total of $7,585,157 in financial outlays for lump sum, cash payments, back pay, salary adjustments, accommodation, recruitment and training costs, etc.
Of this total in financial agreements, $1,884,238 in back pay awards went to 299 women, minorities, handicapped persons and veterans.
Over 10,480 contractors were provided voluntary technical assistance to better enable them to comply with OFCCP regulations.
In addition, by the end of fiscal 1985, approximately 250 liaison groups had been formed.
These groups explore general compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
They contribute valuable input to OFCCP on ways to improve the compliance process, and address aspects of affirmative action unique to their employment situations or industries.
OFCCP, in turn, provides advice, specific technical assistance and an exchange of information.
In 1,679 instances, OFCCP arranged "linkage"agreements between employers and agencies providing worker training or referral services.
During fiscal 1985, a number of initiatives were in effect or were begun to increase program outputs and improve quality and program effectiveness.
A uniform system for selecting contractor establishments for compliance reviews.
The system provides computer screening of contractors to observe historical trends in Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) profiles.
This screening identifies contractors, by industry and by geographic areas, whose workforce participation rates for women and/or minorities fall below the average for similarly situated contractors.
Case management procedures, including the monitoring of cases in progress, to assure timely completion of compliance reviews and complaint investigations.
Such case management procedures have reduced the number of hours required to conduct compliance reviews and complaint investigations.
Increased focus on case quality assurance; regional quality audits; enhanced National Office accountability review procedures to ensure investigative content and consistent application of regulations and procedures.
Continued encouragement of contractors'voluntary efforts toward affirmative action by increased high quality technical assistance, by recognition of contractors whose compliance efforts are meritorious, and by the forming of liaison groups with OFCCP.
Completion of the OFCCP Microcomputer Prototype Project in March, 1985.
Its results indicated that a microcomputer system would be cost-effective in giving OFCCP personnel data processing capability for making the tabulations and statistical analyses necessary for compliance actions and for creating the records, reports and documentation for these actions.
In September, 1985, an in-depth study was completed that examined the relationship between the quality of compliance actions and the time expended to conduct them.
The continued development and implementation of additional guidance on proving and remedying systemic discrimination.
Completion of the revision to the Contract Compliance Manual to coincide with agency policy and to provide better guidance to compliance officers.
Enhancement of management information systems to improve the quality, integrity, and timeliness of data used in evaluating contractor performance, as well as our own performance.
Realignment of area office structure to improve the responsiveness of the agency to program needs, to maximize the allocation of resources and to improve management of program operations.
Development of a revised training program to address the needs of professional field staff for programmatic training.
The training will result in increased quality and efficiency in the compliance review process and the investigation of complaints.
Through its Divisions of Legislative Analysis, State Employment Standards Programs, and State Workers' Compensation Programs, the Office of State Liaison and Legislative Analysis provides assistance to the States and coordinates Federal-State activities in the areas of workers'compensation, labor standards, and equal employment opportunity.
The Division of Legislative Analysis played an active role in the preparation of testimony and background materials for hearings held by the Senate on the Supreme Court's decision in Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority et al.
The Garcia decision extended coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act to employees of State and local governments.
The Division also developed testimony and background materials for Congressional oversight hearings held on the funding of black lung benefits and the processing of black lung claims, and on affirmative action requirements for Federal contractors.
The Division continued its participation in the development of the youth employment opportunity wage proposal that was again proposed by the Administration.
Additionally, the Division monitored and prepared reports on Congressional actions on immigration reform and on other program areas of interest to ESA.
The Division also developed issues papers for legislative decisions and regulatory materials required under Executive Order 12291.
The Division of State Employment Standards Programs furnished expertise to ESA on State labor standards laws and programs, and on issues that impact on or are affected by ESA programs.
The Division developed considerable information on State employment standards, particularly on subjects of major interest to ESA, such as the interaction between State law and the proposed youth opportunity wage, developments in the prevailing wage field, and existing State standards in relation to the Garcia decision.
In the promotion of improved Federal/State coordination of similar programs, the division served as catalyst and facilitator in the consideration of proposed ESA/State agreements for cooperative activities.
The Division provided technical advisory assistance and information on numerous labor standards subjects in response to some 500 requests from State labor departments, management organizations, multi-State employers, organized labor, other Federal agencies, the Congress, and others.
Throughout the year, the Division maintained active working relationships with State governmental labor officials and their organizations, and participated in several regional and national conferences of State officials.
In serving as a national clearinghouse of information on State legislative developments, the division reviewed and analyzed about 1,000 State labor bills and new laws and published summaries of approximately 375 of these bills.
The Division of State Workers’Compensation Programs serves as a national clearinghouse of information on State workers' compensation laws.
It analyzed 260 enacted workers'compensation amendments from 1,400 proposed amendments during fiscal 1985 and prepared 10 reports and analyses of State workers' compensation laws.
The Division provided on-site technical assistance to 13 State workers'compensation agencies in the implementation or improvement of their information systems.
It also provided on-site technical assistance to nine State workers'compensation agencies and five State legislative committees in the improvement of their rehabilitation programs.
In conjunction with the International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commission (IAIABC), the division updated its in-depth profile on the administration of each State workers'compensation agency for inclusion in the publication, State Workers Compensation Administration Profiles.
The Division worked closely with eight States in arranging and conducting workers'compensation conferences for educational purposes and/or to focus on issues for possible legislative changes.
In fiscal 1985, the Mine Safety and Health Administration made special efforts to expand its cooperative programs with industry and labor to further improve protection of the Nation's miners.
There were 170 deaths in U.S. coal and metal and nonmetal (noncoal) mines during the fiscal year, compared with 165 fatalities in fiscal 1984.
Of the total deaths during the 1985 fiscal year, 27 fatalities occurred in a single accident in December 1984, the Wilberg Mine fire in Utah.
During and after that fire, many MSHA safety specialists, technicians, and others worked countless hours overseeing rescue and recovery operations at the Utah mine site, conducting engineering and technical activities related to mine ventilation and roof control, testing for toxic gases, conducting a thorough accident investigation, and other activities.
Although the totals for the past 2 years were above the recordbreaking low figure of 131 mine deaths during fiscal 1983, they were considerably lower than the average fiscal year toll of 229 deaths during the 1980-1982 period.
The incidence rates per employee production hours for all types of injuries in accidents declined in both coal and noncoal mining during fiscal 1985, compared with the rates for fiscal 1984.
The fatal injury rate in metal and nonmetal mining during fiscal 1985 was about the same as the rate for 1984, while the fatal rate for fiscal 1985 in coal mining showed a rise from the rate in fiscal 1984.
Among other activities, several MSHA programs that provided special aid to coal mines having above-average injury rates were successful in reducing rates at nearly 70 percent of participating mines.
Significant programs to expand health activities included a new initiative to monitor the effectiveness of lung x-ray surveillance of coal miners as well as increased monitoring of toxic substances at selected coal and noncoal mines.
An MSHA-produced program graphically depicting fatal accident causes and circumstances over several years continued to be well received by the mining industry as a valuable miner training tool.
During the fiscal year, the descriptive program, which used a 35-millimeter slide format was distributed at no charge to interested mine managers and safety officials.
It was further refined as a continuing education tool to better reflect specific types of mining activities, accident categories and varying mine environments.
Other materials that were issued during the year to aid industry miner training capabilities included safety training and hazard recognition materials dealing with the use of vehicle seatbelts, mine ventilation practices, the special on-the-job dangers facing supervisors and foremen, and the hazards of alcohol and drug abuse in mining.
Following publication of a series of articles on substance abuse in MSHA's magazine, the agency participated in formation of a joint industry-labor-governmental committee to address problems of alcohol and drug abuse at mine sites.
Committee members later took part in congressional hearings on the abuse of substances on the job.
In emphasizing cooperation and communication with management, labor and State agencies throughout the country in activities to safeguard miners' health and safety, the agency also sponsored or took part in a number of conferences and symposiums.
Several projects to review thoroughly eight priority sections of MSHA's metal and nonmetal regulations and major coal mine safety rules to update and clarify them, and to remove needless burdens on those affected by the regulatory process continued in fiscal 1985.
A new final rule on fire control and prevention in metal and nonmetal mining became effective in April 1985, and a final rule on the safe loading, hauling and dumping of materials was near publication by the end of the fiscal year.
Proposed rules being prepared at that time included those governing explosives use at coal and noncoal mines.
Among other agency programs and activities, the number of civil penalty assessments for violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act by mine operators increased 5.4 percent, and the dollar amounts collected increased more than 20 percent during fiscal 1985.
Following the disastrous earthquake in Mexico City in September 1985, MSHA mine emergency and rescue specialists joined the international rescue effort there, and, through use of sophisticated sensing equipment, helped locate and save the lives of several victims.
It should be noted that, in the following sections, some data on accident rates, inspections, and investigations are preliminary, and subject to slight changes later.
During fiscal 1985, MSHA oversaw coal miners'safety and health at 2,460 underground mines, and 4,493 surface mines and surface facilities under the Agency's jurisdiction.
Coal mine inspectors, technical specialists, education and training specialists, and supervisors operated from 10 district offices, 18 subdistrict offices and 68 field offices.
At the end of fiscal 1985, the coal mine safety and health work force numbered 1,637.
During fiscal 1985, MSHA made 68,448 coal mine inspections and investigations.
Of these, 49,492 were at underground mines and 18,956 were at surface mines and noncoal producing facilities.
MSHA issued 101,046 citations and orders to coal mine operators and independent contractors for violations of safety and health regulations.
Supervisory officials held 2,000 annual health and safety conferences to discuss inspectors'findings at the request of mine operators or labor representatives.
Coal mining fatalities numbered 102 in fiscal 1985, up from 90 in fiscal 1984 and the recordbreaking low of 76 in fiscal 1983.
This total, however, is the third lowest number of fatalities recorded in the history of coal mining.
Further, 27 of these 102 fatalities occurred in the Wilberg Mine (Utah) disaster in December, 1984.
The fatal incidence rate for fiscal 1985 was .06 deaths per 200,000 employee hours, compared to .05 fatalities during fiscal 1984.
However, the incidence rate for all types of injuries in coal mining declined from 6.59 per 200,000 in fiscal 1984 to 6.29 in fiscal 1985.
Of the 90 coal mine fatalities experienced in fiscal 1984, a total of 32 were due to falls of roof, face or ribs (walls) in underground coal mines.
The number of roof fall fatalities decreased from 32 in fiscal 1984 to 22 in fiscal 1985, a decrease of 31 percent.
It is strongly felt that the Roof Evaluation-Accident Prevention (REAP) program, initiated in April of 1984, has had a significant impact on reducing the number of such accidents which have historically been the most frequent cause of coal mine fatalities.
The average number of coal mining employees (excluding office workers) declined from 199,978 in fiscal 1984 to 192,009 in fiscal 1985.
MSHA investigated 205 complaints of safety- or health-related discrimination that coal mine personnel filed with the agency during the fiscal year.