American workers continued to reap rewards from the Reagan economic expansion during the 1986 fiscal year.
More Americans were working than ever before.
Because inflation was kept in check, they could buy more with their earnings.
Mortgage and other interest rates dropped significantly, stimulating the economy and allowing American workers to buy more homes and consumer goods.
Meanwhile, the Nation made further inroads against poverty, especially among blacks and older Americans, and the average worker had more take-home pay because of the Administration's tax reforms, moderately rising wage rates, and reduced inflation.
Against this background, we in the Department of Labor moved to improve further the situation of American workers and our delivery of services to them.
In addition to a new managément system which we initiated, we took a number of significant actions, and key administrators were named to carry out our goals.
Each agency within the Department drew up supporting objectives to fine tune this system, and to reach out to special groups with special problems, such as the unemployed, minority and other youths, disabled veterans, single heads of households, and displaced homemakers.
I am proud of employees of the Department, who pitched in to make this management system work.
Their commitment provided the margin of success for this system and for other actions we took during the year.
To improve economic opportunities for America's workers by increasing job opportunities, health and safety in our workplaces, and retirement security.
To enhance America's ability to compete successfully in world markets by promoting labormanagement cooperation, improving education and training for workers, and adopting cost-effective regulations to protect them.
To increase the productivity, effectiveness and creativity of the Labor Department's operations through more employee motivation and involvement, better coordination of activities within the Department, and more private sector support.
Our management system provided a plan for the next three years.
But we realized that we had to look much further ahead.
Major changes were already taking place in the world economy, in the American labor force, and in technology; and more radical changes lay ahead.
We needed to know, among other factors, the kinds of occupations that would be in demand 10 or 15 years hence.
We knew that, with the changes taking place and expected to continue through new technology, the average worker in the future was faced with a career consisting of a succession of widely differing jobs.
The capacity to learn would be at a premium.
This would require adaptability and a stronger educational base than most American workers now possess.
Workers of the future would need better reading, mathematical and reasoning skills so that they could learn increasingly complex new jobs.
To learn more about the scope of this problem and to provide possible solutions, we established a "Work Force in the Year 2000" project.
Anticipate future employment needs of the Nation.
Define and devise ways to meet these challenges and to take advantage of opportunities.
Make positive plans for a skilled U. S. labor force that would be à critical factor in remaining competitive in the world economic market.
In this changing picture, one of the most serious problems was illiteracy.
Tragically, 23 million Americans could not read a simple sentence.
Yet by the year 2000, a sizeable proportion of the Nation's jobs will require education or technical training beyond high school.
Because of the high correlation between illiteracy and unemployment, and because of the anticipated need for workers with a more solid basic education, we faced the possibility of a permanent underclass of unemployable, or marginally employable, men and women unless we took firm steps to meet this crisis.
Broadcasting Company and the Public Broadcasting Service.
I met with leaders of this project and pledged the support of this Department.
Because men and women who cannot.
The first phase of PLUS, which ended in the closing days of the fiscal year, stressed reaching out to these people and to local groups being organized to deal with this problem.
The second phase was to include documentaries on the two networks and other programs to heighten awareness among the public at large.
At the very end of the year, a Labor Department effort to obtain legislation mandating literacy training by Job Training Partnership Act (JPTA) sponsors passed Congress.
Under the new JPTA provisions, State and local sponsors of job-training programs were required to provide more emphasis on literacy instruction and remedial education in the Summer Youth Employment and Training Program.
They were also required to place increased emphasis on literacy and dropout prevention in year-round education programs for the disadvantaged.
One of the special problems of a changing, dynamic economy is plant closings which throw large numbers of men and women out of work.
Many of these workers have little prospect of reemployment in their areas or in their former occupations.
In October 1985, I appointed a 21-member Task Force on Economic Adjustment and Worker Dislocation, chaired by Malcolm R. Lovell, Jr., Director of George Washington University's Industrial Relations Institute and a former Under Secretary of Labor.
I charged this task force with exploring the whole problem of plant closings, evaluating present programs, and suggesting alternatives.
The task force was asked to report to me by the end of December 1986.
Meanwhile, we took further steps during the year to improve our services to youths and displaced workers.
We began a new effort to coordinate JTPA resources at the local level with those of other Federal human resources programs.
We started a program to decentralize and improve the integrity of the unemployment insurance system and to speed the transition to employment of unemployment insurance recipients, including the long-term unemployed.
Also, at the fiscal year's end, we announced four public meetings in different parts of the Nation to examine the role of the U. S. Employment Service and to obtain the public's response on possible changes to meet future labor market needs.
Faced with a persistent problem of unemployment among veterans, especially the disabled, we started a Jobs for Homeless Veterans demonstration project, which was scheduled to operate in 10 States during fiscal year 1987, and we established a National Veterans Training Institute to train State employment service personnel in meeting the special needs of veteran job applicants.
With growing numbers of women, including working mothers and displaced homemakers, in the labor force, we took special steps to help these workers.
During the year, we continued to advocate options which include child-care programs, more flexible work schedules, flexible benefit packages, and other ways to meet the needs of working parents and their families.
We also started programs to help teenagers, women veterans, and women seeking to move up the corporate ladder.
Understanding that the average worker of the future would be older than 1986's, we launched a new specialemphasis effort in the Department to help find long-term solutions to the problems of older Americans, whether still in the labor force or after they have left it.
I named a special coordinator for seniors in the Department to explore the problem and to coordinate efforts of our various units, as well as those of outside groups.
Finally, in trying to cope with the work force of the future, we continued our efforts to increase cooperation, and lessen confrontation, between labor and management.
At the same time, we tried to promote efforts to improve workers' job satisfaction and to increase worker participation in decisionmaking and solving workplace problems.
During the year, we conducted or cosponsored 52 conferences or other meetings to further these cooperative goals.
We also began a long-term inquiry into deterrents to cooperation between labor and management in existing laws and collective bargaining practices.
To improve safety and health in American workplaces, we moved ahead on several fronts.
We showed our determination to take meaningful action against employers whose violations pose serious threats to large numbers of workers when we proposed penalties of nearly $1.4 million against Union Carbide Corporation for safety and health and recordkeeping violations at its Institute, WV, plant.
Although this action attracted the most attention, many of the other actions during the year may prove more significant for the long-term health and safety of large numbers of American workers.
Ten major safety and health standard-setting actions, including a major hazard communication standard which set rules for informing workers about exposure to dangerous conditions in their workplaces while protecting industry trade secrets.
Special-emphasis programs focusing major enforcement and training initiatives on industries and occupations presenting acute safety and health problems; these included the chemical and fireworks industries, hazardous-waste disposal sites, trenching and excavating in construction, and special efforts to enforce the hazard communication standard.
A new program aimed at reducing back injuries, the single largest source of compensable injuries in the American workplace.
To protect American miners and workers in related fields, we took a number of actions, including an accident reduction program in coal mines employing small numbers of miners.
These mines had accounted for a disproportionate share of mining deaths.
We also expanded our joint campaign with industry and labor to combat drug and alcohol abuse in the mining industry and mounted a special alert on the dangers of methane explosions in coal mines.
During the fiscal year, civil penalties were assessed for more than 100,000 violations of mine safety and health standards.
In order to improve security in retirement for workers and their families covered by private sector pension plans, another of our major goals, we elevated the former Office of Pension and Welfare Benefits Programs to the sub-Cabinet level.
An assistant secretary was appointed by the President to head the new Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.
Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), which also covers private sector employee benefit plans, were streamlined, and better coordination was achieved between this Department and other Federal agencies having jurisdiction under ERISA.
During the year, we recovered more than $100 million for workers, retired persons and their beneficiaries through ERISA court actions and voluntary settlements, and we conducted 47 separate criminal investigations under this law.
A bipartisan task force was created and made recommendations on curtailment of plan terminations in cases where excess assets are taken over by a plan's sponsors rather than distributing them to beneficiaries.
An important achievement affecting employees of State and local governments was passage in November 1985 of legislation sought by this Department to ease the impact of the U. S. Supreme Court's ruling in Garcia vs. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority.
This ruling, which held that State and local governments were subject to the overtime pay requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act, had placed a large burden on the shoulders of public employees, their employers and the taxpaying public.
Employees faced the loss of hard-won concessions from their public employers, including the right to accrue compensatory leave instead of receiving overtime pay.
The law we sought, and which Congress passed and the President signed, eased these burdens and allowed employees to take advantage of compensatory time off.
During the year, we continued our efforts to prevent fraud, waste and abuse in our own programs and in those funded by the Department, and to improve the economy and efficiency of these operations.
Ending corruption in pension and welfare benefit plans continued to have the highest priority as the Inspector General's Office of Labor Racketeering obtained 114 indictments, an increase of 25 over the previous year.
In the management of Department activities, we continued efforts to provide better services at lower costs.
Specific efficiency improvements were achieved in a number of areas, including auditing of leave, processing of travel vouchers, small purchases, space utilization, and computer services.
Looking to the future, we began to plan for the 75th anniversary of this Department, which will take place in 1988.
We hope to present a number of programs which will highlight to the public the role of American workers in our society over the years, and the role of government and the private sector in providing for their protection and improving their well-being.
We view this past year as one of solid achievement, building for the future and moving forward to provide better services for American workers and their employers.
The Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), centerpiece of the Reagan Administration's employment and training policy, completed its second full year of operation on June 30, 1986, the end of Program Year 1985.
During this period the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) emphasized improving JTPA's effectiveness in serving youth, particularly in terms of raising literacy levels, and displaced workers.
ETA also began a new effort to coordinate JTPA resources at the local level with those of other Federal human resources programs.
To prepare for the vast changes that will take place in the labor force and labor market from now through the 1990s, ETA launched a wide-ranging study of the world of work as it will be in the year 2000.
Information generated by "Work Force 2000" is expected to stimulate public awareness and·debate, particularly at the local level, and aid local communities in anticipating future employment needs.
The skills and talents of the entire work force must be developed if the U.S. is to regain its international competitiveness.
ETA moved in new directions with respect to the unemployment insurance program.
The major emphasis was on decentralizing the day-to-day administration of the UI program to the States, improving the integrity of the program, and accelerating and smoothing the transition to reemployment for UI recipients, especially for the longterm unemployed workers.
Title II-A provides for a system of bfock grants to the States to support local training and employment programs for youth and adults.
States are responsible for further allocating funds to Service Delivery Areas (SDAs) and for overseeing the planning and operating of local programs.
About 93 percent of the participants were economically disadvantaged, and females and minorities accounted for 52 and 49 percent of participants, respectively.
Fiftyseven percent were high school graduates, and 26 percent drop-outs.
About 72 percent of the participants received major services involving classroom training, on-the-job training, and job search assistance.
A small proportion was provided work experience and other services.
Of the 793,794 participants who left the program, about 60 percent entered employment at an average hourly wage of $4.63.
Youth had a positive termination rate of about 65 percent.
Title II-A funding totaled $1.9 billion for PY 1985.
Summer Youth Programs.
Summer Youth Employment and Training Programs under Title II-B of JTPA provide economically disadvantaged youth with job opportunities, training, and educational services during the summer months.
Service Delivery Areas (SDAs) received a total of $781.5 million for the 1985 summer program which served approximately 788,000 youth.
Beginning with the summer 1986 program, the Department initiated an effort to encourage the States and summer program operators to implement a remedial education and vocational exploration program for participants.
The initiative addresses the problem of illiteracy that affects high-risk youth, and provides them the basic skills for performing regular academic work during the school year.
The summer program model is designed to combine work experience with remedial education and/or vocational exploration and involves the assessment of the literacy levels of participants to determine if these youth meet locally determined educational standards.
Youth who fall below these standards are enrolled in a remedial education component as part of the summer program; those youth who meet the educational standards can be enrolled in vocational exploration activities.
Dislocated Worker Program.
Funding for Title III activities during program year 1985 totaled $222.5 million.
Of this amount, $167.25 million, was allocated directly to the States, and $55.25 million was reserved for use by the Secretary.
During PY 1985, a total of 90 projects in 39 different States were funded from the Secretary's reserve account.
The majority of these projects were directed toward specific groups of dislocated workers, usually those affected by one or more plant closings.
Projects assisting workers from agriculture, timber and wood products, coal mining, rubber and tires, electronics, communications equipment, steel, heavy equipment, automobiles, shipbuilding, and aerospace were among those funded during PY 1985.
During the past 2 program years, the Secretary of Labor has also set aside a total of $20 million from the national reserve account to support projects aimed at dislocated workers from the copper, steel, and footwear industries.
Enrollments under Title III during PY 1985 totaled 208,061.
Of the 132,239 participants who terminated from the program, 69 percent entered employment.
In cooperation with the Bureau of Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative Programs and with the National Governors' Association, ETA introduced State officials to a Canadian method of responding to worker dislocations.
The "Canadian model" places more emphasis on early intervention, labor-management cooperation, and employee and corporate involvement in placing workers than do most State systems in the United States.
In addition, most programs in Canada concentrate on direct placement, without providing skills training.
Representatives from 35 States attended conferences in PY 1985 to learn how the Canadian model works.
Six of these States were chosen to run pilot projects testing the feasibility of applying the Canadian approach in the U.S.
Special Targeted Programs.
Under Title IV of JTPA, the Indian and Native American Employment and Training Program continued in PY 1985 to support a wide variety of services through grants to Indian tribes, other Native American communities, and various related organizations.
Many grantees developed initiatives in support of the Secretary's goals for the Department.
These included: (1) enhancing the literacy skills of Indian youth, recognizing the fact that successful job training and placement are dependent upon adequate reading and writing skills, (2) increasing efforts to use other funding sources, particularly in the education area, to help defray the costs associated with classroom training, such as Pell grants, student loan programs, and special Indian education grants available in some States, and (3) working more closely with the private sector to customtailor training activities to the jobs available.
During PY 1985, approximately 26,500 Indians and Native Americans were served at a cost to $62.2 million.
In terms of services, 30 percent received classroom training, 10 percent received on-the-job training, 25 percent were in work experience, 4 percent were in community service employment, and 31 percent received various supportive services.
The Department requested Native American grantees to emphasize services to youth during the program year.
Initiatives launched under the Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker (MSFW) Program during PY 1985 to meet the Secretary's goals for the Department and to strengthen services to youth included the development of: (1) partnerships between farmworker program operators and private industry which lead to the evolution of customized job training and (2) linkages between grantees and labor union locals to utilize apprenticeship training programs.
The MSFW program is authorized under JTPA Title IV.
Two grantees were accredited as educational training institutes by the Council for Noncollegiate Continuing Education in PY 1985.
In the continuing effort to coordinate with other human resources programs to maximize outcomes, grantees were instructed to refer eligible farmworker youth to Job Corps centers.
Youth employability enhancement activities were also a feature of PY 1985 programs in which 9,484 farmworker youths aged 14-21 (19 percent of the total) participated.
During PY 1985, the overall program served 50,055 persons at a cost of $64.1 million.
More than 11,000 participants received classroom training; 7,300 were placed in on-the-job training, and 2,000 were placed in work experience positions.
Job Corps.
During program year 1985, the Job Corps operated 106 training centers at a cost of $627 million, providing a wide range of training, education, and support services, primarily in residential centers, for disadvantaged youth aged 16 to 21.
Job Corps is authorized by Title IV of JTPA.
Job Corps centers provided 38,300 service years and served approximately 63,000 new enrollees during PY 1985.
The majority of Job Corps centers continued to be 100 percent residential; 44 centers operated combined residential/nonresidential programs.
Nonresidential enrollment was 9.9 percent during the program year.
During this period, plans were developed to implement innovative pilot, demonstration, and linkage projects which would build on the past success of the Job Corps and make the program even more effective.
Projects selected for pilot testing included establishment of nonresidential Job Corps centers, designation of a center to operate through a public/private sector partnership, provision of child care services to corpsmembers, and development of local linkages with other JTPA programs for recruitment, placement, and training.
These projects will be evaluated for their overall impact on performance and costs.
Successful approaches will provide the basis for Job Corps II and be replicated at additional centers.
Programmatic initiatives during PY 1985 included the continuation of pilot projects to serve 22- to 24-year-olds, and to test computer-assisted instruction.
Both of these projects will be evaluated during program year 1986.
In addition, designated center facilities were rehabilitated and equipped to accommodate handicapped enrollees.
In PY 1985 the Šenior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP) provided employment for over 63,000 older persons with an appropriation of $326 million.
During the year, a number of initiatives were undertaken to respond to the Secretary's goals for the Department and to enhance the effectiveness of the program.
These included an increased emphasis on coordinating SCSEP activities with other employment programs.
Of particular importance was the development of closer linkages with sponsors of JTPA's 3 percent set-aside for older workers and with the Job Corps.
Efforts were also initiated to strengthen interagency activity for older workers.
An example is the development of a closer and more productive relationship with the Administration on Aging of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
During Fiscal Year 1986, more than 317,000 apprentices received training, and more than 94,000 new apprentices entered training.
Female apprentices accounted for 7 percent of the total, and 18 percent were members of minority groups.
For several years, ETA has made special efforts, in cooperation with the Defense Department, to develop and expand apprenticeship in the Armed Services.
In Fiscal Year 1986, approximately 43,000 uniformed personnel were enrolled in apprenticeship programs conducted by the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps.
The Defense Department also sponsors apprenticeship programs for its civilian employees.
During the year, there were over 46,000 apprenticeship programs registered with ETA or the 31 State apprenticeship agencies, including more than 2,700 new programs developed during the year.
Federal staff conducted 1,600 reviews of apprenticeship programs to assure compliance with the provisions of equal employment opportunity in apprenticeship regulations.
Early in fiscal year 1986 and in accordance with the Carl D. Perkins Vocational Education Act, the Departments of Labor and Education developed aninteragency agreement and implementation plan to promote greater coordination between vocational education and apprenticeship training programs.
Pursuant to this agreement and plan, a National Coordinating Steering Committee was established and a joint letter was sent by the Secretaries of Labor and Education to all Governors encouraging them to create State Apprenticeship/Vocational Education Coordinating Steering Committees to foster cooperative efforts.
Development of a technical assistance guide for promoting apprenticeship/vocational education cooperation was also initiated.
During program year 1985, 19.9 million persons registered with the public employment service; 8.3 million received some job-related services and 3.8 million were either placed in jobs or obtained one after receiving some services.
Labor exchange expenditures for these quarters were approximately $740 million.
Work continued on updating the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT), a basic reference for many employers, schools, and other personnel-related activities.
Emphasis is on identifying, analyzing, and defining new and emerging occupations and verifying information currently in the DOT.
The DOT second supplement, which contains 840 additional occupations, was published during the year.
The public employment service continued to assist in thę administration of the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program, as authorized by the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984.
The program is intended to facilitate employment and job experience for those who traditionally find it difficult to obtain and retain suitable jobs (e.g., disadvantaged youth, handicapped, ex-offenders, etc.).
During the first quarter of fiscal year 1986, 293,659 persons were issued vouchers identifying them as members of a TJTC target group, and more than 148,203 certifications were issued.
The TJTC program expired on December 31, 1985.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 reauthorized the program for 3 years, retroactive to January 1, 1986.
The U.S. Employment Service and its affiliate State agencies administer a labor certification program under which approximately 34,000 applications for permanent and temporary labor certifications were processed in FY 1985, with 27,000 applications certified for approval.
In calendar year 1985, approximately 21,000 applications for jobs in temporary agricultural work, to be filled by foreign workers, were certified.
During the year, the Employers'National Job Service Committee (ENJSC) provided guidance and leadership to about 1,200 local Job Service Employer Committees involving over 30,000 employers from all types and sizes of firms, as well as 38 State and 9 DOL regional committees.
JTPA authorizes a nationwide computerized job bank program, and the Interstate Job Bank computer tape-totape exchange of job openings information has grown rapidly to include approximately 10,000 openings each week, with a weekly turnover of about 10 percent.
The listed openings, submitted by States because they are hard-to-fill locally, are forwarded to more than 20,000 locations each week for reference and applicant referral.
During PY 1985, some 65,000 new jobs were distributed, about half of which were professional and managerial occupations.
About 11,000 applicants were referred to these jobs.
In fiscal 1986, the budget for the Work Incentive (WIN) program totalled $210.5 million.
WIN's objective is to restore AFDC (Aid to Families with Dependent Children) applicants and recipients and their families to economic independence and enable them to assume a useful role in the community.
Approaches used by States to achieve this include job search, work experience, on-the-job training, vocational and other classroom instructions, and supportive services.
Regular WIN programs are jointly administered by the Department of Labor, through ETA, and by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), through the Family Support Administration (FSA).
At the State level, regular WIN programs' are managed jointly by the State employment service and thé State welfare agency.
States may also choose to conduct a WIN demonstration program which is administered solely by HHS' Office of Family Assistance and the State welfare agency.
In FY 1986, 26 States operated demonstration programs, while 28 States (including the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands) continued to operate regular WIN programs.
The WIN population differs substantially from the mainstream work force.
In the WIN client group, 79 percent are women, 54 percent are minorities, and slightly more than half have less than 12 years of school.
It is estimated that 1.5 million individuals were registered in WIN in FY 1986, through both regular and demonstration programs.
Of these, an estimated 343,000 found unsubsidized jobs and 162,000 earned enough to be removed from welfare.
During calendar year 1985, 20.6 million initial claims for unemployment benefits were filed with State Employment Security Agencies (SESA's).
There were 109.8 million weeks compensatedfor total unemployment and 9.7 million weeks compensated for partial unemployment in calendar year 1985.
Regular unemployment (UI) benefits are payable for up to 26 weeks in most States.
Extended benefits (EB) are payable in individual States when periods of high unemployment in the State trigger EB payments, increasing a claimant's benefit entitlement by half the individual's regular benefit entitlement, up to a total maximum of 39 weeks.
In FY 1986, extended benefits were paid by four States.
Improvement was reflected during FY 1986 in State benefit financing and repayment of loans from the Federal Unemployment Trust Fund.
These loans had peaked as of March 31, 1984, when 26 States had outstanding loans totaling $14 billion.
During FY 1986, stable rates of insured unemployment and improved financing structures combined to permit many States to.
As of July 31, 1986, the number of States with unpaid loans stood at 13.
The balance of outstanding loans had been reduced to $4.8 billion ($3.7 billion interest free and $1.1 billion interest bearing).
Monthly borrowings during FY 1986 ranged from a high of $495.5 million in March to a low of $58.5 million in May.
Trust fund balances of the 40 States not in debtor status as of June 30, 1986, amounted to $17.3 billion.
ETA moved in several new directions with respect to the UI program and policy during FY 1986.
The major emphasis has been to decentralize the day-to-day administration of the program to the States while proceeding with two major policy initiatives: (1) improving the integrity of the UI program, and (2) accelerating and smoothing the transition to reemployment for UI recipients, especially for the long-term unemployed workers.
In December 1985, the Department launched a major effort to improve the adequacy and equity of the financing of the SESA administration.
Under the existing system, appropriations from FUTA tax receipts are allocated by ETA to the SESAs through grants, based on measured productivity factors, estimated workloads, and other formulas, thus determining not only the level of resources available to a State, but also the priorities that the States must assign to the various administrative activities.
Based on broad public input in response to solicitations for comments, the Department announced its decision in May 1986 to adopt four short-term revisions to the administrative financing process: (1) replace quarterly recapture of unused base grant funds with annual recapture only; (2) substantially reduce fiscal reporting as rapidly as possible; (3) eliminate detailed Federal monitoring of State financial administration of the UI programs, and (4) consolidate contingency categories and contingency overhead funding.
These changes allow states more flexibility and bottom-line authority in mianaging their resources, provide productivity incentives, and reduce Federal monitoring.
Work is continuing on determining the appropriate long-term changes.
During fiscal year 1986, ETA continued its emphasis on developing and implementing a comprehensive, integrated approach to improve the accuracy and timeliness of UI program activities, including the collection of UI revenues and the payment of UI benefits.
The principal component of this effort is the UI Quality Control system (QC).
States also continued to direct attention to ongoing program integrity activities and techniques to identify and eliminate problems before they occur.
By the end of the fiscal year, 30 States had installed the Model Crossmatch System and 34 States were operating the Model Recovery System, which have been developed to better identify potential fraud cases and increase the amount of overpayments collected.
More than $280 million in overpayments were established and more than $135 million recovered during the fiscal year.
In July 1985, prior to implementing the proposed QC program design, the Secretary initiated a comprehensive review of the QC program and sought public comments on its major features.
As a result of consultations with all interested parties, the Secretary announced a series of modifications to the QC program and affirmed the Department's intent to continue to consult with interested parties as the program evolved.
In April 1986, States commenced voluntary implementation of the QC program to test the operation of the system prior to final clearance of the revised QC program design by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
All SESAs had volunarily implemented the program prior to the June 1986 official OMB approval.
Under the uniform QC program, each SESA is sampling its claimant file to identify problem areas, analyzing the problems, and acting on the findings.
At the same time, efforts have begun to expand QC to other UI program areas such as benefit'denials and revenué collections.
QC in these areas will provide the SESAs with a comprehensive tool to better ensure that the UI program is operating effectively and efficiently.
One of the priority goals of the Department and ETA for fiscal year 1986 and beyond is to improve the ability of displaced workers to adjust more rapidly and effectively to the changing demands of the labor market and in smoothing the transition of UI claimants in their return to suitable work.
An internal ETA work group was established to examine the relationships and improve the coordination between local JTPA, employment service, trade adjustment assistance, and UI programs and activities in order to facilitate the return of UI claimants to work.
In addition, a special project grant was allocated to the State of New Jersey for a comprehensive test of several forms of reemployment assistance that are not currently available to UI claimants.
The $5.2 million demonstration is looking at ways to speed the return to work of unemployed individuals who appear likely to exhaust their UI benefits and who may have difficulty finding new work.
Statutory authority for the trade adjustment assistance (TAA) provisions of the Trade Act of 1974 expired on September 30, 1985.
A series of emergency extension acts continued the TAA program to December 19, 1985.
On that date P.L 99-199, the third continuing resolution, provided funding for Sections 236, 237, and 238 of the Trade Act, which includes training, job search allowances, and relocation allowances for workers adversely affected by imports, through September 30, 1986.
On April 7, 1986, P.L. 99-272, the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, amended the Trade Act by extending TAA for workers for six years to September 30, 1991.
It also restored trade readjustment allowance (TRA) payments retroactive to December 18, 1985, required eligible TRA recipients to participate in a job search program, and made other changes to the adjustment assistance program.
A total of 1,752 worker TAA petitions were filed with the Department during fiscal 1986, a 71 percent increase over the number received the previous fiscal year.
Some 93,130 workers were certified as eligible to apply for TAA benefits and reemployment services compared with about 25,400 workers in the prior year.
Many of these workers were separated from employment in firms manufacturing apparel, electronics, footwear, and steel products.
TAA data for the first 8 months of fiscal 1986 show that 27,545 workers received TRA payments totaling $62.2 million.
In addition, 719 workers received job search allowances totaling $161,294, and 1,599 workers received relocation allowances totaling $1.1 million.
The number of workers entering training programs totaled 5,393.
Policy and planning activities focused primarily on three issues in fiscal 1986: Work Force 2000, coordination of Federal human resources services, and creating a literate work force.
Continuing responsibilities included support for ETA's legislative agenda and for the Secretary's management system.
Work Force 2000 is an effort to identify and analyze demographic and economic trends in employment through the end of the century.
It is also a vehicle to raise public awareness and stimulate debate and action with respect to identified labor force and labor market trends.
The mismatches between projected workplace needs and work force capabilities represent both challenges and opportunities.
Policy papers were developed and national leadership meetings were held on Work Force 2000.
Through ETA's initiative, DOL took a leadership role in demonstrating how coordination of services and cooperation between Federal and local agencies can produce more cost-efficient and more successful outcomes for persons receiving human resources services.
DOL, in cooperation with the Departments of Education and Health and Human Services and with other Federal agencies, embarked on large-scale cooperative ventures, involving jointly funded and managed pilot and demonstration programs.
These projects link services to teen parents, dropouts, the handicapped, and other groups at all levels and thus increase the effectiveness of the assistance provided through individual programs.
A major Administration goal, the reduction of illiteracy, has become a primary focus for ETA and was the subject of a special effort of the policy and planning group.
Among other things, this effort consisted of jointly funded projects, under the coordination initiative, that encourage literacy; development of a legislative proposal to include literacy training in JTPA's summer youth programs; a series of policy papers examining various aspects of illiteracy prevention and remediation, and cooperation with the American Broadcasting Companies, Inc., (ABC) and the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) in the development of PLUS (Project Literacy U.S.).
PLUS consisted of a series of national network broadcasts and community activities to raise public awareness and generate ways of dealing with the problem of illiteracy on the local level.
ETA participated in congressional oversight hearings on a number of issues: JTPA, Job Corps, trade adjustment assistance, immigration, veterans' employment and training, America's changing demographic profile, and the Education and Training Partnership, a proposed new agency to coordinate activities under JTPA, the Wagner-Peyser Act, and the Carl Perkins Vocational Education Act.
ETA also prepared the Department's position on numerous legislative proposals including Job Corps and JTPA (the 1986 amendments).
Planning and policy staff developed ETA's supporting goals as part of the Secretary's management system, instituted a tracking system to assure achievement of the Secretary's goals, and prepared the annual Training and Employment Report of the Secretary for submission to Congress.
ETA continued to conduct studies which provided the basis for briefs and reports in accordance with DOL's oversight responsibilities.
The final phases of multiphase studies on JTPA implementation and the effects of the JTPA Wagner-Peyser amendments were completed.
Reports of both studies indicated that JTPA is evolving as anticipated by the legislation.
Data from the Job Training Longitudinal Survey (JTLS), the primary mechanism for gathering data on the characteristics of JTPA participants, showed that JTPA continues to serve the intended clientele (over 90 percent of the Title II-A participants are disadvantaged) with the intended service (training).
In addition, ETA began the development of a group of field experiments to measure the impacts of JTPA II-A programs on participants' postprogram labor market experience.
ETA continued to focus efforts on the problems of youth.
Cities in Schools projects were established through joint funding with the Departments of Justice, Education, and Health and Human Services to combat the high dropout and crime rates among inner-city youth.
JTPA funds provide basic education and other employability services.
Similarly, the Summer Training and Education Program (STEP), which completed the second year of a 3-year program, continued to combine part-time employment with competency-based remedial education and "life skills classes."
JOBSTART also provided remedial education, skills training, and other assistance to school dropouts.
A key feature of the STEP and JOBSTART programs is significant funding from private foundations.
Business is involved in Cities in Schools projects through private industry councils (PICs).
Other nationally administered· pilot, demonstration, and multi-State programs provided training and other employment-related services to special-needs groups, such as the handicapped, youth, displaced homemakers, single parents, older workers, and persons of limited Englishspeaking ability.
The issuance of an updated performance standards adjustment model for adult and youth programs and the development and approval of postprogram data collection were important program year 1985 activities.
Performance measures for JTPA Titles II and III, Job Corps, and programs serving Indians and farmworkers remained unchanged.
There was emphasis on refining and updating Title II adjustment models to assist States in setting local standards.
Work continued on developing adjustment models for Indian, farmworker, and Job Corps programs measures.
ETA provided ongoing assistance through various technical assistance guides and customized training for State and local staff operating Title II programs.
Training conferences for more than 800 JTPA representatives on PY 1986 standard-setting methodology, and new youth welfare and postprogram initiatives.
In PY 1985, ETA conducted approximately 600 reviews in the 57 JTPA recipient entities and made about 75 follow-up visits to assure that appropriate actions were taken to correct identified problems.
The ETA regional offices have the primary responsibility for direct Federal oversight of the JTPA programs operated by the States.
To determine State compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements, ETA conducts onsite compliance reviews covering critical areas in each state.
Reviews are focused on systems, policies, and procedures established at the State level.
Where reviews indicate problems involving a failure to conform to Federal requirements, ETA informs the State of these findings and alerts the State that corrective actions should be implemented to correct deficiencies.
Other findings are provided to the State on an advisory basis.
While compliance reviews are conducted at the State level, sub-State visits to SDAs are made on a sample basis to verify that States have communicated policies and procedures to the operator level and that operator activities are being monitored by the State.
Other oversight activities included special studies and evaluations required by Section 454 of JTPA.
For PY 1986, ETA plans to move to a more proactive oversight role.
See section on Financial Management).
Although the virtual closeout of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) reduced the number of incoming audits, ETA issued final determinations for 369 audits during program year 1985.
Included in this amount were nine final determinations resulting from audits of the Federal share of unemployment compensation programs initiated by the Department's Office of the Inspector General (OIG).
ETA is responsible for issuing final determinations on all of these audits after consultation with the OIG.
During program year 1985, 467 contracts and grants funded by the national office were closed.
Nearly 430 actions remained pending for reasons such as appeals of contract or grant officer determinations, unresolved audit issues, pending debt collection actions, and pending requests for the establishment of an indirect rate.
An important new development was the creation of a new proactive partnership role for ETA under JTPA.
Three major components are included in this new partnership: a policy guidance system will advise States as to the legalities and acceptability of proposed policy decisions; a management review and consultant system will identify problem areas and assist States in developing and implementing improvements, including providing any needed technical assistance; and the compliance review system will be restructured to reduce the number of onsite visits to States and State agencies.
This will be accomplished by eliminating and combining review guides and coordinating visits.
ETA collected approximately $13 million of the debt established through the audit resolution process in PY 1985.
Approximately $11 million of this amount consisted of cash collections.
Also, more than $12 million of debt was referred to the Department of Justice for litigation or other debt collection followup.
In addition, ETA began a comprehensive review of accounts receivable resulting from CETA audits and contract and grant closings for purposes of developing settlement options for all remaining CETA debt cases.
During the same period, 21 internal control reviews, surveys, and management reviews were conducted in the process of carrying out ETA's responsibilities under the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act.
Nearly 600 preaward reviews were completed on potential ETA contractors or grantees.
Thirty-two onsite investigations were conducted to determine whether the grantees or contractors were in compliance with the legislative and regulatory requirements applicable to them.
A total of 568 incidents of alleged fraud, abuse, or other criminal activity were reported through the ETA Incident Report system or the General Accounting Office/Office of Inspector General Hotline system.
Corrective action was initiated where appropriate.
In an effort to strengthen the integrity of ETA programs, onsite reviews were conducted independent of program office activities on a sample of 24 national office programs.
These reviews focused on program operations and financial systems.
The primary issues identified were misclassification of costs, lack of cost allocation plans, inadequate documentation for verification of participant eligibility, and failure to follow government travel regulations.
The appropriate program office initiated requests for corrective action where necessary.
In 1986, the Bureau of Labor Statistics continued to produce and maintain the quality of the national economic indicators and other essential statistical programs in the areas of employment, unemployment, prices, wages, productivity, economic growth, and safety and health.
Among the major developments was an acceleration of work in the Consumer Price Index program as the deadline for publishing a revised CPI approached.
An intensive effort focused on completing the required computer systems to process and publish the revised index beginning with data for January 1987.
The revised CPI introduces updated market baskets that reflect population and spending patterns from the 1982-84 Consumer Expenditure Surveys, introduces previously unpriced prgducts, and reduces detail for expenditure categories with declining relative importance.
Another revision program, that of the Producer Price Index, marked a major milestone in 1986 with completion of new or revised indexes for all industries in the mining and manufacturing sectors of the economy.
Completion of this work concludes the first comprehensive overhaul of index methods since the origin of the index at the turn of the century.
Fiscal year 1986 saw the culmination of several years of effort to revise and reissue guidelines for emplóyers who record occupational injuries and illnesses.
The new guidelines are part of the Bureau's ongoing work to improve the Nation's work injury and illness statistics.
Multifactor productivity.
The Bureau reviewed preliminary measures for all 2-digit manufacturing industries.
Service sector initiatives.
The Bureau published a Producer Price Index for the oil pipeline industry and an import price index for electricity.
The Bureau also published Employment Cost Indexes for 8 additional service sector industries and for the goods-producing and service-producing sectors at the aggregate level.
The Bureau issued six industry labor productivity measures and continued developmental work on price, productivity, and wage measures.
Average hourly earnings.
The Bureau introduced a new series that includes lump-sum payments in the aerospace industry.
The Bureau also reinstated the suspended series that excludes such payments.
These series, used by the aerospace industry to escalate contract sales of equipment, had been the subject of controversy since the employer practice of substituting lump-sum payments for wage increases began a few years ago.
The Current Population Survey.
In a joint effort with the Bureau of the Census, BLS examined all aspects of this program.
The review of data collection methods gave particular attention to the possible use of computer-assisted telephone interviewing.
Further research is planned for 1987.
Permanent Mass Layoff and Plant Closing study.
Four more States signed developmental agreements with the Bureau and 13 States submitted test data during the year.
Consumer Expenditure Survey.
A new weighting scheme was introduced to improve the population estimates from the Diary and Interview samples.
The Bureau continued to meet the labor force data needs of the press, business, academia, Congress, and government agencies.
Analyses included the regular monthly summaries of employment, and quarterly reports on women, families, weekly earnings, and minorities.
Special analytical projects on employment by industry, part-time workers, and earnings resulted in articles published in the Monthly Labor Review.
In addition, BLS produced major studies on the following subjects: "Rural America in the Mid-1980's," for the Joint Economic Committee; "Employment Conditions Among Black Americans" and "Families at Work" for the Department of Labor; and "Changes in the Labor Force, Employment, and Unemployment: Implications for the Low-Income Population"for the White House.
Data from the recurring October and March supplements and from two other supplements to the Current Population Survey were analyzed and made available to the public.
These included a first-time supplement on disabled Vietnam-era veterans (April 1985) and one on the work patterns and preferences of workers (May 1985).
Several articles on topics such as flexitime, absences, and moonlighting were prepared for the Monthly Labor Review.
In addition, data on women veterans were introduced.
Research activities on displaced workers continued and included: Providing support for the Secretary's Task Force on Economic Adjustment and Worker Dislocation, a research summary based on matched 1984 and 1985 data, and analysis of data from the January 1986 supplement on displaced workers.
Research on the use of computer-assisted telephone data collection in the Current Employment Statistics survey continued to yield impressive results which could lead to improvements in timeliness and data quality.
Large-scale tests leading to implementation are planned for fiscal years 1987 and 1988.
Research also focused on identifying new businesses more quickly to improve data quality.
The Bureau completed the third year of cooperative agreements for its labor market statistical programs with 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
Cooperative agreements for fiscal year 1987 were developed for these areas and also for American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
In addition to its technical responsibility, the Bureau assumed financial responsibility for the Covered Employment and Wages program (ES-202), previously under the jurisdiction of the Employment and Training Administration.
Emphasis was placed on the collection, analysis, and use of cost, productivity, and performance data to improve program management.
Activities in this program continued to focus on improving both the quality and timeliness of the data.
Installation of a system which edits data at the macro level was completed in the majority of States.
The redesign of the existing exportable State microdata processing system was begun.
This system will enable the States to meet program standards and to increase the efficiency of their operations.
The 1984 Employment and Wages bulletin and annual reports on average pay and employment change by State were issued earlier than in previous years.
This earlier release of data is attributed to previously implemented initiatives to improve State operations.
Standard Industrial Classification refiling of industries was completed in the majority of those States which had fallen behind in their refiling activities.
An exportable system was developed which will enable States to monitor their review of SIC refiling work more efficiently.
BLS staff continued to devote considerable time to the interagency effort, headed by the Office of Management and Budget, to update the SIC codes to reflect the changing composition of American industry.
The publication of the new SIC codes in fiscal year 1987 will mark the first significant revision of the industrial classification system in 15 years.
The Occupational Employment Statistics program developed for States' use an exportable software package which will prevent any inadvertent disclosure of data relating to a single employer.
Significant strides were made during the year in developing the Permanent Mass Layoff and Plant Closing program.
Four States signed developmental agreements with the Bureau, bringing total participation to 44 States and the District of Columbia.
During 1986, 13 States completed developmental work and submitted test data for review of quality and adherence to program specifications and guidelines.
By the end of fiscal 1987, all currently participating States are to submit either test or ongoing program data.
In addition to these activities, the Bureau.
Completion of the study and analyses of the results are expected early in fiscal 1987.
The level of activity in the Consumer Price Index program accelerated to meet the objective of publishing a revised CPI for January 1987.
Data collection from more than 60,000 housing units was initiated for the new shelter survey, increasing the number of housing quotes threefold.
Price collection for commodities and services was begun in the 20 new geographic areas to be included in the revised CPI.
This, along with the new procedures for the revised index, required an extensive new training program in data collection in all areas.
Finally, an intensive effort focused on completing the computer systems necessary to process and publish a revised index.
As with revisions of all major programs, the period immediately preceding the release of a revised CPI was one of intense activity which required the coordinated efforts of economists, statisticians, computer systems analysts, and regional staff in the 91 geographic areas in which data are collected.
The 1987 CPI revision continues the improved method for estimating homeowner shelter costs, called rental equivalence, adopted in 1983.
The new index features a sample design that produces the most accurate national CPI possible but reduces the frequency of publication from bimonthly to semiannual average indexes for some areas.
Both the CPI for All Urban Consumers and the CPI for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for January 1987 are linked to the previous series of each index as of December 1986 to provide a continuous series.
As in the past, BLS is continuing to publish selected indexes using the old expenditure weights for 6 months after the issuance of the revised CPI.
The Producer Price Index program marked a major milestone—the publication of new or revised indexes for all of the industries in the mining and manufacturing sectors of the economy.
The program also began publishing a new stage of processing series in 1986, which is industry-based and includes greater detail—primary manufacturing—for the intermediate stage.
In addition to its regular publication of annual estimates of consumer expenditures and income, the Consumer Expenditure Survey program developed a new weighting scheme to improve the estimates derived from the program's two samples—one for the Diary Survey and one for the Quarterly Interview Survey.
This weighting scheme was the subject of professional review at a conference sponsored by the Bureau of Labor Statistics in March.
Papers from this conference were published in a compendium titled Population Controls in Weighting Sample Units.
The CES program also changed its geographic sample this year, collecting data in the same 91 areas as the CPI, plus 17 rural areas.
Under the initiative to develop indexes for the service sector of the economy, the Bureau developed new indexes for both the producer price and international price programs—a PPI output index for the oil pipelines industry and an international import price index for electricity.
The use of the Employment Cost Index by both the public and private sectors continued to increase during 1986.
The expanded use of the ECI by the Department of Health and Human Services in determining Federal payments for Medicare was the most important of the new applications.
A major aerospace company requested permission from the Department of Defense to use the ECI, rather than the Average Hourly Earnings index, to escalate prices in contracts with the Department.
Also, during the year, the Bureau estimated preliminary cost levels from the ECI data for use by the Employment Standards Administration in pay determination under the Service Contract Act.
A complete review of the operational and conceptual treatment of benefits was finished.
This review will become part of the broader analysis of concepts being carried out by the Office of Research and Evaluation on wage and benefit cost measurement.
The recommendations of the review will be incorporated into the index as time and resources permit.
The service sector expansion, begun in 1985, hit full stride.
In addition to the indexes for individual servicesector industries which were the primary goal, the expansion allowed a number of other indexes to be published.
These included separate indexes for the goods- and service-producing sectors.
Within each sector, indexes for both union and nonunion workers were published.
Also published were indexes for all workers excluding sales workers and for white-collar workers less sales workers.
Finally, indexes of compensation were issued for all occupational groups for which wage indexes are published.
To accommodate the service sector expansion, the Bureau developed and implemented an improved quality management program.
Also developed was a new occupation selection procedure that will reduce variance of indexes and the burden on survey respondents.
Two projects required to ensure the continued viability of the program were completed during the year.
First, the 1970 census employment counts by industry and occupation that were the fixed weights of the ECI were replaced by 1980 census employment counts.
Second, the last of the original establishment sample, selected in 1974, was replaced.
This systematic replacement of the establishment sample, now completed, will ensure that in the future no establishment will be in the sample for more than 4 years.
Finally, the implementation of the second portion of the new wage data entry and editing system introduced efficiencies which ensure that the remainder of the service sector expansion will proceed as planned.
The 1986 National Survey of Professional, Administrative, Technical, and Clerical Pay was delivered on schedule for use in the Federal pay comparability process.
The survey was expanded to increase its coverage of firms with as few as 50 workers, including small firms in high-technology industries.
As part of the present Administration's initiative to improve the PATC survey, the Bureau is planning to expand the survey to include service industries not now studied.
The annual Employee Benefits Survey of paid leave and employee insurance and pension plans in medium and large firms was conducted with expanded inquiry into emerging and rapidly changing provisions and practices.
This nationwide benefit survey, done in conjunction with the PATC survey, provides a unique source of comprehensive data on detailed characteristics of employee benefit plans—leave, retirement, capital accumulation, and insurance—in private industry.
The Bureau has published an annual bulletin including an analysis of benéfit trends since 1979, the first survey year.
This program produced a Monthly Labor Review article during the year on trends in cost containment and coverage in health insurance plans.
Seventy area wage surveys were conducted under the Bureau's regular program of occupational wage surveys in metropolitan areas.
The incidence of employee benefits also was studied in 22 of these areas, and new job descriptions for electronic data processing occupations were introduced in 16 areas.
Planning was completed for converting the area wage program to a 90-area survey beginning in January 1987.
The 32 largest areas will be surveyed annually, and the 58 smaller areas will be surveyed in alternating groups of 29 each year.
The surveys will be probability-based and will reflect 1984 metropolitan area definitions published by the Office of Management and Budget.
Under a contract with the Employment Standards Administration, 89 area wage surveys and 6 special industry wage surveys were conducted for use in administering the Service Contract Act.
The industry surveys included first-time studies of forestry and logging activities in four Western States and of unlicensed employees on deep sea, dry cargo freighters.
Plans for the 1987 program call for 86 area surveys, 2 surveys of food service establishments, an expansion of the forestry studies to cover six States, and surveys of oceangoing tugboats and deep sea tankers as well as freighters.
Eight industry wage surveys were conducted this year.
Timeliness of interim and final reports continued to improve, with publication lags dropping as much as 3 months in some cases.
Test questions were added to the life and health insurance survey, and questions on contracting practices were added to eight manufacturing industry surveys (four in fiscal year 1986 and four in the first quarter of 1987).
These questions were designed to shed light on changing wage and occupational structures in the industries covered by the program, as well as to test procedures for collecting such information.
Data on the size of wage and compensation adjustments in major collective bargaining settlements (covering 1,000 or more workers) in private industry were published each quarter.
Similar data were issued semiannually for State and local governments.
The Bureau published detailed analysis of negotiated wage and benefit adjustments during 1985 for private industry and State and local governments.
The 1986 bargaining calendar was issued, providing data on major contracts scheduled to expire or subject to reopening during the year.
An analysis of bargaining activity slated for 1986 was published in the January 1986 Monthly Labor Review.
It examined key bargaining situations scheduled for the year, provided data on wage changes deferred to 1986 from settlements reached in earlier years, and gave information on potential cost-ofliving adjustments.
Data analyzing major work stoppages during 1985 were published in February 1986.
Current Wage Developments was published each month.
It highlighted key events in labor-management relations and provided details of wage and benefit changes in individual major bargaining situations.
It also contained monthly statistics on major work stoppages, listings of expiring agreements, and extensive data on changes in employee compensation in the nonagricultural economy.
BLS further strengthened and expanded the program of measurement and analysis of productivity and technology—topics of substantial public interest.
Productivity measures are widely regarded as major indicators of U.S. economic progress, and the Bureau refined and extended the series of published measures to provide broader coverage.
The number of industries for which BLS published labor productivity measures was expanded to include the following: metal doors, sash, and trim; metal stampings, and oil field machinery.
A total of 140 separate productivity measures are now issued for industries in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
The Bureau also made progress in measuring productivity in the government sector.
The productivity measures for the Federal Goyernment were updated to cover fiscal year 1984.
These measures currently cover fiscal years 1976 to 1984 for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies, representing 67 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
In addition, measures for several State and local government activities were updated.
The multifactor productivity measures published for major sectòrs of the economy advanced a major BLS effort to expand official productivity measures to take account of the role of capital equipment in changes in U.S. labor productivity.
First introduced in fiscal 1983, these key measures benefitted from considerable effort made over the past year to refine and extend them.
Preliminary measures of multifactor productivity were completed for all 2-digit manufacturing industries and are in the process of review.
Developmental work on a multifactor measure for the tires and tubes industry was completed.
Studies are under way to assess factors that affect productivity movements, including the impact of research and development expenditures, changes in labor force composition, changes in capacity utilization, changes in factor prices and depreciation schedules, and changes in the relationship of hours worked to hours paid.
In the international area, the Bureau updated trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 12 countries and continued research toward the development of multifactor productivity measures for Germany and Japan.
The measures of comparative levels of hourly compensation costs for production workers in 34 countries and 39 manufacturing industries and the series on international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in 10 industrial countries also were updated.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
In response to substantial public interest, the Bureau continued to assess the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years were prepared for four additional major American industries—tires, aluminum, aerospace, and banking.
The Bureau published labor force, economic, and industry and occupational employment projections for the 1984-85 period.
The 1986-87 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook also was completed and published.
An analysis of the shift of employment and output from goodsproducing industries to service-producing industries was published in the Monthly Labor Review.
The article, "Deindustrialization and the Shift to Services,"addressed concerns about the supposed loss of the country's industrial base.
Other Review articles presented alternative projections for the health services and the computer manufacturing industries and addressed concerns about changes in the pattern of employment growth.
The Review also included additional analysis and discussion of the "declining middle class" as well as a report on the temporary help industry.
BLS published Occupational Projections and Training Data, a bulletin containing data on occupational employment growth and training patterns for use in career guidance and education planning.
The Occupational Outlook Quarterly featured special analyses on the job prospects for college graduates.
Articles focused on the improving prospects for all college graduates and for those receiving Ph.D. and MBA degrees.
Other articles in the Quarterly discussed the need for computer training, the outlook for childcare workers, and job prospects for recreational therapists.
The spring 1986 issue presented the Job Outlook in Brief, which summarized the employment prospects for all occupations in the 1986-87 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
As part of its continuing effort to improve the Nation's work injury and illness statistics, BLS issued new guidelines to assist employers in keeping better injury and illness reports.
New publications containing the guidelines, as approved by the Office of Management and Budget, are Recordkeeping Guidelines for Occupational Injuries and Illnesses, a detailed version containing comprehensive information, and A Brief Guide to Recordkeeping Requirements for Occupational Injuries and Illnesses, an abbreviated version of the guidelines for ready reference and to aid managers and employers in small establishments.
The guidelines represent the official Department of Labor interpretation of employer recordkeeping requirements under the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and 29 CFR Part 1904 and have been described by OMB as supplemental instructions to the recordkeeping forms, OSHA Nos. 200 and 101.
The guidelines (which replace the 1978 Report 412-3, What Every Employer Needs to Know About OSHA Recordkeeping) and the forms are approved through December 31, 1988.
Copies of both versions of the guidelines were made available for nationwide distribution.
Copies of the abbreviated version were mailed nationwide to employers with 100 or more employees.
In addition, the Bureau and its regional offices have launched a comprehensive training and promotional effort to assist employers, employees, and others in using the new materials.
BLS continued to assist the expert panel selected by the National Academy of Sciences' Committee on National Statistics in its study of the quality of BLS occupational injury and illness statistics.
The Bureau contracted for the Academy study in 1985 as part of its effort to improve the quality of occupational injury and illness data.
Another initiative to improve the quality of injury and illness statistics was BLS sponsorship, in December 1985, of a symposium of government, academic, and business representatives to discuss ways to improve the measurement and reporting of occupational illnesses.
As an outgrowth of the symposium, several State health departments have continued to assist BLS in work to improve the measurement of occupational illnesses.
The Bureau reported results of the 1984 Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses in a November 1985 news release including national estimates of incidence rates and numbers of occupational injuries and illnesses by industry.
Detailed statistics by industry and size of establishment were published in a subsequent bulletin issued in May 1986.
Occupational fatality estimates and causal characteristics appeared in an article in the May 1986 Monthly Labor Review.
Individual State estimates for 1984 were produced by 39 States.
In February 1986, the Bureau mailed survey forms to about 280,000 employers nationwide to collect 1985 data.
In fiscal 1986, 32 States participated in the Supplementary Data System, which provides detailed data on the characteristics of work injuries and illnesses based on State workers' compensation records.
Microdata files for 1985, which include records for over 1 million cases, are to be available from the National Technical Information Service.
NTIS also will make available standard Supplementary Data System Tabulations for 1985, showing distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by industry and occupation.
Work Injury Reports released in fiscal year 1986 were Injuries to Construction Laborers and Injuries to Warehouse Workers.
Surveys in progress included chemical and heat burn injuries; injuries to longshore workers; injuries involving heavy construction equipment, and injuries involving industrial machines in manufacturing.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health use results of work injury studies to evaluate and develop safety standards, compliance .
Resources.
The Bureau completed the third year of cooperative agreements for its labor market statistical programs with 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
We developed cooperative agreements for fiscal year 1987 for these areas along with American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
This year, BLS assumed financial responsibility for the Covered Employment and Wages Program, formerly under jurisdiction of the Employment and Training Administration.
BLS is stressing the collection, analysis, and use of cost, productivity, and performance data to improve program management.
Technology.
The year saw a major achievement in the Bureau's use of microcomputer technology—the installation of Local Area Networks in all regional offices.
BLS staff brought microcomputer facilities into successful operation through user training in network management, workstation operations, and remote job entry.
The development and installation of workstation software permitted the replacement of regional keypunch operations—an important technological step forward.
Work to establish the basic structure of the Bureau's long-term network environment progressed well.
BLS staff completed a research and development effort to identify and select the next generation of networking software and introduced a policy for procurement and management of network resources.
Publications.
Under a pricing formula which BLS helped work out, the Government Printing Office significantly reduced the prices of BLS periodicals.
In addition, 2-year subscriptions (instead of the previous limit of one year) became available for the Bureau's periodicals, thus making annual renewals unnecessary for subscribers who prefer multiyear contracts.
Five of the Bureau's publications won awards in competitions sponsored by the Society for Technical Communications and the National Association of Government Communicators.
Because of the needs of a growing number of BLS data users to store and analyze information on personal computers, BLS began making its data available on diskettes.
Fiscal Year 1986 marked a continuation of OSHA's efforts, begun in earlier years, to expand communication and cooperation to enhance the ability of government, labor and industry to improve working conditions in our Nation's workplaces.
Without abandoning traditional efforts at standard setting and enforcement, OSHA began or continued a number of initiatives designed to encourage voluntary efforts to eliminate or control workplace hazards.
Such initiatives ranged from a cooperative venture with the American Society of Safety Engineers and the Associated General Contractors to celebrate jointly the fifth annual National Safety in the Workplace Week, June 21-25, to special emphasis programs to focus on particular workplace hazards or particularly dangerous industries.
A number of new safety and health standards were finalized during the fiscal year and several new hazards were the subject of proposed standards.
Inspection activities were highlighted by vigorous enforcement of safety and health standards.
Record high penalties were proposed as a result of the inspection of Union Carbide Chemical Company that found many alleged violations of standards and recordkeeping requirements.
Training and education efforts were stepped up in recognition of the importance of such programs.
Consultation visits to employers, particularly small employers without staff safety and health expertise, continued to be a valuable adjunct to OSHA's inspection programs.
OSHA's Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) were expanded to recognize the excellent safety records of several companies added to the roster of VPP participants, and OSHA continued to stress cooperation in its partnership with the States that operate their own safety and health programs.
During the year, OSHA continued its effort to develop standards that are protective, flexible, and cost effective.
An updated version of the Electrical Standard for Construction Sites was one example of this effort.
This final standard comprises four major parts: installation safety requirements for electrical equipment and installations; safety-related work practices, not only in the use of electrical equipment but to avoid accidental contact with energized lines both above and below ground; safetyrelated maintenance and environmental conditions; and safety requirements for special equipment.
OSHA also proposed updating its Accident Prevention Tag Requirements to add flexibility and to better protect workers.
Accident prevention tags temporarily warn workers about a hazard until it is eliminated or permanent protection can be provided.
A tag will alert workers to defective equipment or warn them against energizing an electrical circuit while another employee is working on it.
Under a new final rule issued at year's end, employers are no longer required to maintain detailed records of certain equipment and material maintenance tests and inspections.
Instead, certifications will be allowed that only need to include the date the inspection or test was performed, the signature of the person conducting the test, and an identifier of the equipment tested.
This change affects provisions of OSHA's general industry and shipyard standards.
Also, a proposed rule was published during the year under which ship builders and repairers would no longer be required to fill out material safety data sheets to satisfy both OSHA's maritime standards and its hazard communication standard; instead, they need comply only with the latter.
Another proposed rule would cover servicing Single Piece Rim Wheels in Marine Terminals.
Under the proposal, the approximately 5,000 employees who service rim wheels at 400 marine terminals would be afforded the same protection as workers who perform similar operations in general industry.
In the area of health standards, OSHA published a final standard covering asbestos exposure in general industry and a new standard covering employee asbestos exposure in the construction industry.
The new standards limit employee exposure to asbestos to .2 fibers per cubic centimeter of air as an eight-hour time-weighted average, a ten-fold reduction from previous limits.
Final amendments to the standard for occupational exposure to cotton dust (originally promulgated in 1978) were issued December 13, 1985.
The revisions include incorporation of an action level; modification of exposure monitoring requirements; extension of compliance deadlines for ring spinning of coarse count yarn with high cotton content; addition of a protocol for determining equivalency to the vertical elutriator (a device for measuring levels of cotton dust); incorporation of a wage retention provision for workers removed from exposure for medical reasons; exclusion of oil mist from the definition of cotton dust; clarification of the scope of coverage; and substantial changes to the washed cotton provisions of the standard to reflect current research.
On September 30, 1986, OSHA published final rules amending the Hazard Communication Standard.
The amendments include a new definition of the term "trade secret" that removes from the definition coverage of chemical identity information that is readily discoverable through reverse engineering.
A separate change includes provisions that permit employees, their designated representative, and occupational health nurses to have access to trade secret information.
A proposed rule on benzene was published in the Federal Register on December 10, 1985.
The new proposal would reduce the permissible limit for worker exposure to benzene to 1 part per million parts of air (1 ppm), measured as an eight-hour, time-weighted average.
In addition, an action level of 0.5 ppm and provisions for exposure control methods, personal protective equipment, exposure monitoring, training, medical surveillance would be included in the new standard.
OSHA also published.
It would reduce the permissible limit for employee exposure to formaldehyde to an eight-hour time-weighted average of either 1 or 1.5 ppm and would require the employer to take other actions, such as exposure monitoring and medical surveillance, to protect employee health.
In FY 1986, OSHA conducted a total 64,071 inspections.
This total, although less than the 71,639 inspections conducted the previous year, reflects a greater focus on health inspections and on special emphasis programs, both of which take significantly longer time than safety inspections.
In the largest enforcement action in its history, OSHA cited Union Carbide Corporation for a total of 221 instances of alleged safety and health violations and proposed a $1,377,700 penalty.
The citations resulted from the completion of the first phase of a comprehensive, wall-to-wall inspection begun at the site on September 17, 1985.
The willful violations focused on two areas: the company allegedly failed to provide respiratory protection to employees required to be exposed to unknown levels of phosgene, and it allegedly failed to record instances of injuries, including those requiring medical treatment or resulting in restricted activity or lost workdays.
It also allegedly failed to provide critical supplemental medical information on asbestosis cases.
Along with the violations, OSHA made nearly 200 recommendations aimed at improving plant safety.
In FY 1986, OSHA strongly emphasized the importance of employers maintaining proper workplace injury and illness records.
Such records are essential both for an employer's own safety and health program, and as the basis OSHA uses to target its inspections in the most hazardous workplaces.
To help address broad concerns for safety and heakh problems in the chemical industry, OSHA began a special emphasis inspection program in that industry.
Initially operated as a pilot program, OSHA will make detailed and comprehensive audits of plant safety as well as the usual workplace inspection.
Special emphasis programs also were established in other industries to focus OSHA inspection attention on troublesome areas.
These included fireworks manufacturing, trenching operations, cleanup operations of hazardous waste sites, and inspections to assure compliance with OSHA's Hazard Communication standard.
OSHA also began a pilot program to help employers reduce back injuries, which acċount for an estimated one-fifth of all workplace injuries and illnesses.
Under the pilot program, OSHA inspectors checked for reports of back injuries whenever they consulted an employer's accident records, reviewed the employer's training program for lifting and other administrative and engineering controls, and offered whatever help the employer needed in training, job-redesign or other measures.
Special Emphasis Programs carried over from FY 1985 and completed.
In addition, OSHA recognized that local conditions could require special emphasis enforcement programs specific to individual regions of the nation.
Accordingly, 15 such programs were proposed by the 10 OSHA regions and approved by the national office.
They will continue as long as conditions require, subject to ongoing reevaluation.
They include programs such as that for the logging industry in Region X, cotton dust in Region IV, smelters in Region IX, fall hazards in construction in Regions VII and VIII, and oil and gas excavation in Regions V and VI.
OSHA's Hazard Communication Standard, promulgated on November 23, 1983, became effective for employers who manufacture, import, or distribute hazardous chemicals in FY 1986.
The standard has far-reaching importance, both in providing necessary information on workplace hazards to employees, and in its performanceoriented nature for employers.
The Directorate of Field Operations participated in a significant program to train both employers and OSHA staff in the requirements of the standard, and in means employers may use to achieve compliance with it.
An enforcement directive was prepared, with two later revisions, to guide the field in implementing the standard.
In addition, a considerable effort went into developing and distributing interpretations of the standard's provisions, which were made readily available to affected employers.
Federal agencies continued their efforts to achieve the President's goal of a three-percent reduction of injuries and illnesses per year for the next five years.
During the third quarter of Fiscal Year 1986, seven agencies were meeting the President's goal: the Departments of Agriculture, Housing and Urban Development, and Interior; the General Services Administration; National Aeronauticsand Space Administration; Tennessee Valley Authority; and the Veterans Administration.
In the government as a whole there was a 7.1 percent reduction in injuries and illnesses.
OSHA provided assistance to Federal agencies in the areas of training, consultation, targeting, evaluations, enforcement, and incentive programs.
In addition, new recordkeeping and reporting guidelines for Federal agencies were published in conjunction with new forms that were issued by the Department's Employment Standards Administration.
OSHA also evaluated the occupational safety and health programs of the Departments of Health and Human Services and Justice.
The 40th Annual Federal Safety and Health Conference was held in New Orleans, LA, on October 28-30, 1985, in conjunction with the National Safety Council's Congress and Exposition.
There were more than 500 attendees at the conference, representing more than 35 Federal agencies and 40 Federal Safety and Health Councils.
The conference provided a valuable forum for presenting information and ideas that would assist the agencies in developing programs to assure on-the-job safety and health protection for Federal workers.
During FY 1986, OSHA continued to strengthen its partnership with the States.
Twenty-five States and territories are administering their own OSHA-approved State plans.
Twenty-three plans cover both private and State and local government -employment; two, Connecticut and New York, are limited in scope to employees of the State and its political subdivisions.
OSHA officials attended quarterly meetings held by State plan officials to assure the States' continued involvement in policy initiatives and other matters of mutual interest.
Granting final approval to one additional State, Indiana, bringing the total to 12.
Final approval for the Arizona, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Tennessee, Utah, and Wyoming State plans was granted in FY 1985, and for the Virgin Islands, Hawaii and Alaska in 1984.)
Final approval reflects OSHA's judgment that, in actual operation, the State plan, is "at least as effective" as the Federal program.
Certifying the Connecticut State plan (which covers only State and local government employees), bringing the number of States which have been certified to 24.
Certification attests to the structural completeness of State plan before OSHA can grant final approval.
New York has approval to administer its plan though certification is still pending.)
Approving the revised compliance staffing requirements (benchmarks) of the four remaining State participants (Indiana, North Carolina, South Carolina and Virginia) in the initial round of the benchmark revision process.
The benchmark revision approvals were in accord with the terms of the Court order in AFL-CIO v. Marshall (C. A. No. 74-406.), and reflect current policies and statespecific information.
Processing inspection data from the New York State plan into OSHA's computerized, Intergrated Management Information System (IMIS), bringing the total to 22 States participating in OSHA's IMIS.
Installation of microcomputers enabling on-line submission and retrieval of data was completed in 20 of the participating States.
Encouraging and providing guidance for States' participation in OSHA-initiated special emphasis programs (Safety Targeting, Superfund/Hazardous Waste Sites, Trenching and Excavation, Fireworks Manufacturing, and Chemical Industry).
Issuing revised State plan monitoring procedures reflecting experience gained since implementing the agency's data-based monitoring system in FY 1984.
During FY 1986 OSHA actively coordinated with the 50 States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands to encourage their development of field sanitation standards and enforcement programs.
A key OSHA goal is improved communication and coordination with employers and employees to supplement enforcement efforts.
The consultation program is one way OSHA assists employers in identifying and correcting hazards and in developing effective management systems for preventing workplace hazards.
Consultation services are provided primarily with Federal funds and at no cost to the employer.
Targeted mainly on smaller employers in more hazardous businesses, consultation may cover all or part of the workplace, depending upon the employer's request.
The service is administered by State government agencies or universities utilizing staff separate from enforcement.
The service is confidential and does not trigger a State or Federal inspection.
The service is penalty free, but employers are required to take immediate action to eliminate employee exposure to imminent dangers and to correct identified serious hazards within a reasonable time.
During FY 1986, OSHA conducted nearly 37,000 consultation visits.
During FY 1986, OSHA published a new system for monitoring the effectiveness of the consultation program.
Consultants expanded their efforts to provide training to employers and employees and to give employers safety and health program assistance.
The program for Inspection Exemption through Consultation continued, with 484 Exemption Certificates being issued during FY 1986.
These certificates were granted to smaller employers wha received a comprehensive consultation hazard survey, corrected all hazards identified, and demonstrated that an effective safety and health program is in operation.
The Wisconsin Occupational Health Laboratory (WOHL), continues to provide analytical services to the majority of the State consultation projects.
The report of the September 1985 OSHA monitoring visit to WOHL was completed.
During FY 1986, WOHL presented the Laboratory Orientation Short Course to 11 industrial hygiene consultants.
In its continuing effort to improve the costeffectiveness and efficiency of the consultation program, OSHA placed a cap (20 percent of personnel costs) on Federal funding of indirect costs.
In addition, a proposal is under development that would place a cap on all overhead costs (both direct and indirect administrative expenses) associated with consultation program operations.
Uniform budget categories were established in FY 1986 which have enabled comparative analyses of State budget submissions in support of this effort.
Consultants continued to support the OSHA special emphasis program in the fireworks manufacturing industry bypromoting their services to these employers.
Assistance in developing effective hazard prevention systems was emphasized.
Thirty-eight consultation visits were made to fireworks manufacturers in FY 1986.
Another program provides for consultation services, including air monitoring for inorganic arsenic, to employers who use inorganic arsenic compounds in the preservative treatment of wood.
To receive this service, employers must request a comprehensive hazard survey.
In another important area, OSHA's Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) continued to reach those companies that are fully committed to employee safety and health and are incorporating these objectives in the daily operation of their workplaces.
There were 11 new approvals in FY 1986.
Participants in the programs continue to avoid approximately 80 percent of the lost workday cases they would have had if their rates were no better than the average for their industries.
The first Star evaluations have found that improvement continues during participation in the program.
Eighty percent of those sites participating in Star in 1984 improved their rates in 1985 and 1986.
The VPP's were formally revised with a notice published in the Federal Register on October 29, 1985.
One of the original VPP, Praise, is being phased out because of lack of interest.
A new demonstration program was instituted to provide an opportunity to participate to companies with excellent safety and health programs but with elements which differ from those required for Star.
Major presentations were made by VPP participants and OSHA staff at the National Safety Congress, the American Industrial Hygiene Association Conference, and the American Society of Safety Engineers' Annual Professional Development Conference.
The participants in the VPP's have formed an association to provide for safety and health information exchange and to promote the concept of the VPP.
The association's second annual meeting was held in Atlanta in September with approximately 90 people in attendance, including representatives of other companies interested in applying to the VPP.
In conjunction with the agency's special emphasis on the chemical industry, VPP procedures were expanded to include coverage of management's process review systems to ensure that VPP participants in that industry are sufficiently well prepared in prevention, control and emergency response.
The FY 1986 enrollment at the OSHA Training Institute for compliance officers, State personnel, Federal safety and health representatives for other agencies, and the private sector was approximately 7,100.
The safety and health training offered at the Institute is an integral element of OSHA's efforts to assist employers and employees in the elimination of occupational safety and health hazards.
The Institute expanded its offering to 61 courses, 15 of which were conducted at sites away from the Institute where actual worksite situations could be experienced.
Four courses for private sector personnel were offered, including one on safety and health for the maritime industry, one for construction, and two for general industry.
In addition, enrollment in 56 technical safety and health courses was opened to private sector personnel for the first time in fiscal year 1986.
The Office of Training and Education developed and presented training to support the agency's Special Emphasis Programs: five sessions of the Fireworks Training Course were conducted; the Process Safety and Health in the Chemical Industry Course, designed for compliance officers who will conduct chemical industry inspections were held in Edison, NJ, Baton Rouge, LA, and Atlanta, GA, and two sessions were presented of the Hazardous Waste Site Inspection Course, designed for OSHA personnel conducting safety and health inspections of EPA Superfund sites.
This year the seminar entitled 'Orientation to Occupational Health Hazard Recognition for Physicians" was expanded to three days.
Presented by the OSHA Office of Training and Education in conjunction with the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and the Medical College of Wisconsin, this seminar is designed to assist physicians in evaluating workplace hazards and diagnosing occupational illnesses.
Development of two crossover courses, Safety Hazard Recognition for Industrial Hygienists and Introduction to Industrial Hygiene for Safety Personnel, was completed.
The materials were provided to OSHA offices and are available for purchase from the National Audiovisual Center.
Under its New Directions grant program, OSHA awarded $1.2 million to 25 nonprofit groups providing a variety of job safety and health services.
The grants support training and education projects addressing serious problems in construction, manufacturing, and other high hazard occupational and industrial sectors.
The New Directions grant program is designed to provide the funds an organization needs to develop its staff, skills, and services to become a competent, selfsufficient center for job safety and health.
Grantees generally participate in the program for up to five years, with some grantees also being funded for a one year planning phase in which the five year program is planned and organized.
Twenty-seven New Directions grantees completed their program in fiscal.
Most of these grantees have become competent, self-sufficient centers for job safety and health.
This group consists of ten labor organizations, four employer associations, four educational institutions, and nine other nonprofit organizations.
Forty-two current and former grantees were awarded supplemental funds at the end of fiscal year 1985 to produce educational materials for OSHA during fiscal year 1986.
These supplemental awards are being used to produce 65 different training program materials, including slide-tapes, videotapes, training courses with visual aids, and manuals.
All Employment Standards Administration (ESA) programs were involved in major initiatives in FY 1986.
Despite budget and staff cuts, the Wage-Hour Division, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, and the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs met or exceeded program plan goals for the year.
The Wage-Hour Division staff focused its attention in FY 1986 on the Garcia Decision by the Supreme Court, which extended minimum wage and overtime coverage under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) to all State, county and local government employees.
The Congress enacted the FLSA amendments on November 13, 1985, to be effective on April 15, 1986.
The Wage-Hour Division issued proposed regulations on April 18, 1986.
The decision by the Supreme Court and the action by Congress changing the FLSA presented the ESA with a wide range of policy and legal issues affecting every political jurisdiction in America.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)continued improvements in its program performance.
Complaint backlogs were reduced; training development was stepped up, and new uses of computer technology were adapted to the program to increase taff effectiveness in the enforcement of affirmative action goals for minorities and women under Executive Order 11246 and in protecting of handicapped employees and veterans under Section 501 of the Vocational Rehabilitation Act and Section 2012 of the Vietnam-era Veterans’Readjustment Assistance Act.
In the Office of'Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP), the first nationwide medical fee schedule was implemented for the Federal Employees' Compensation Program, using 4,400 separate medical procedures applied in 385 geographic areas to review the appropriateness of fees charged by doctors for services to injured workers.
In the Black Lung Program for disabled mine workers, a tax increase was approved by Congress to address the nearly $3 billion debt which the Trust Fund has incurred.
And in the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Programs, final regulations were issued to implement the major revisions to the Act in late 1984.
OFCCP continued to foster affirmative action and the elimination of discrimination from the workplace of Federal contractors, and to obtain redress for victims of discrimination.
During FY 1986, OFCCP completed 5,152 compliance reviews.
The reviewed contractors employed a total of 2.9 million employees.
In addition, OFCCP reduced the number of aging compliance reviews over one year old.
At the end of FY 1986, there were 96 such reviews.
Complaint cases in inventory at the end of the fiscal year declined from 3,208 in FY 1980 to a current inventory level of 658 in FY 1986.
OFCCP conducted 1,100 investigations of discrimination complaints or of failure to take affirmative action.
Where contractor noncompliance was found, OFCCP entered into 1,342 conciliation agreements and 1,999 letters of commitment.
OFCCP also recommended 35 enforcement actions.
These actions can result in removal of contractors from eligibility to compete for federal contracts.
The Solicitor of Labor filed formal administrative complaints against 12 Federal contractors.
Of the agreements obtained in FY 1986, 472 were cash benefit or other financial agreements in which contractors committed a total of $9,802,926 in financial outlays.
These agreements involved lump sum cash payments, back pay, salary adjustments, accommodation, recruitment, training costs and other settlements.
Of this total in financial agreements, $1,911,145 in back pay awards went to 499 women, minorities, disabled persons and veterans.
Since 1982, OFCCP has taken positive steps toward effective voluntary affirmative action in the contractor community.
As a result, in FY 1986 more than 10,715 contractors were provided with 59,807 hours of technical assistance to better enable them to comply with OFCCP regulations.
In addition, 26 liaison groups were formed in FY 1986.
These groups explore general compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
They contribute valuable input to OFCCP on ways to improve the compliance process and address aspects of affirmative action unique to their employment situations or industries.
OFCCP, in turn, provides advice, specific technical assistance and an exchange of information.
In 1,727 instances, OFCCP arranged "linkage"agreements between employers and agencies providing worker training or referral services.
During FY 1986, OFCCP gave further priority to the maintenance of quality and timeliness in its compliance actions.
A number of initiatives were in effect or were initiated to increase program outputs and improve quality and program effectiveness.
Continued implementation of a memorandum of understanding with other DOL agencies to eliminate duplication of compliance efforts, create a more effective exchange of information, and reduce the burden of the activities of the respective offices on the public.
Implementation of the Administration's Productivity Plan (Executive Order 12552) to achieve a 20 percent productivity increase by FY 1992.
For instance, one productivity initiative will be the use of microcomputers by equal opportunity specialists (EOSs) during complaint investigations and compliance reviews.
Based upon the prototype project conducted during FY 1985, microcomputers would enhance the quality and timeliness of complaince reviews by as much as 10 hours each.
Refocusing, over the next 2 to 3 years, program accomplishments away from completed paperwork to resolution of employment problems and help for protected groups.
After the decision by the U.S. Supreme Court in Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority et al. (February 19, 1985), which held that the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) may constitutionally be applied to State and local governments, representatives of many State and local government employer and employee organizations identified several potentially perplexing consequences.
In response to these concerns, the Congress, on November 13, 1985, enacted amendments to the FLSA.
These amendments changed certain provisions of the FLSA as they relate to employees of State and local governments.
For example, the amendments contain special provisions regarding compensatory time off, multiple job situations, and volunteer services.
On April 18, 1986, the department published proposed regulations to implement the amendments (29 CFR 553).
Other FLSA regulatory initiatives in fiscal 1986 included the publication of proposed rules updating the recordkeeping requirements of the Act (29 CFR 516) and an advance notice of proposed rulemaking regarding the minimum wage and overtime pay exemption for executive, administrative, professional, and outside sales employees (29 CFR 541).
Timely response to complaints was the cornerstone of the Wage and Hour Division's enforcement strategy during fiscal 1986.
The division conducted 72,641 compliance actions under the FLSA, of which 55,523 were initiated as a result of complaints from workers or concerned citizens.
The inventory of complaints decreased from 25,590 to 23,488.
The FLSA enforcement program disclosed $40.6 million due 167,401 workers as a result of minimum wage violations, and $92.8 million due 317,216 employees as a result of overtime violations.
Employers agreed to pay $21.9 million in unpaid minimum wages to 150,605 workers and $71.5 million to 274,980 employees due overtime pay for a total of $93.3 million in FLSA back wages in fiscal 1986.
The difference between the amount of back wages found due employees and the amount that employers agreed to pay reflects, for the most part, sums involved in pending litigation and the refusal of certain employers to pay back wages in cases the department deemed unsuitable for litigation.
The FLSA also permits individuals to bring private suits to collect back wages, liquidated damages, attorney's fees, and court costs.
The department's enforcement statistics do not include the back wage amounts recovered in private suits.
In fiscal 1986, 19,527 investigations were conducted under the Special Targeted Enforcement Program (STEP), which is aimed at discouraging employers from employing illegal aliens at less than legal wages.
Because illegal aliens generally do not file complaints, the division targets investigations in industries and localities where aliens have traditionally been found to be employed.
The purpose is to reduce the incentive for hiring those workers who tend to accept employment at less than the minimum wage and/or without proper overtime compensation.
The Wage and Hour Division found 12,662 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA during fiscal 1986.
The division assessed $1.5 million in child labor civil money penalties against 843 employers who were found to be illegally employing 9,758 minors.
During fiscal 1986, the division issued 25,618 certificates under Section 14 of the FLSA, authorizing the employment of approximately 425,800 workers at less than the minimum wage.
Full-time students and handicapped workers employed by sheltered workshops accounted, respectively, for 34 and 61 percent of the workers employed under certificates.
In fiscal year 1986, 10 certificates were issued to employers in the knitted outerwear industry.
Section 11(d) of the FLSA authorizes the Secretary of Labor to issue rules which regulate, restrict, or prohibit industrial homework in order to safeguard the Act's minimum wage requirements.
The regulations currently restrict industrial homework in six industries (gloves and mittens, women's apparel, embroideries, buttons and buckles, jewelry, and handkerchiefs) to individuals who are handicapped and cannot adjust to factory work or are required to remain at home to care for an invalid.
These rules have remained in effect without significant change since the 1940s.
Following a series of regulatory and court actions commencing in 1981, the department published a final rule in November 1984, lifting the homework restrictions for employers in the knitted outerwear industry who obtain certificates from the Department of Labor authorizing such employment.
After carefully reviewing FLSA enforcement in the knitted outerwear industry under the certification process, the Department published proposed rules on August 21, 1986, which would lift the restrictions in the six remaining industries (29 CFR 530).
Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act During fiscal 1986, there were 11,200 registrants (including 8,909 farm labor contractors and 2,291 farm labor contractor employees) who employed approximately 373,807 crew members.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted 6,047 Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA) compliance actions during fiscal 1986 which resulted in civil money penalties totaling $1,676,335 assessed against violators.
At the close of fiscal 1986, 340 Secretary's Orders were in effect denying farm labor contractors and farm labor contractor employees certificates of registration.
MSPA also prohibits a farm labor contractor from knowingly employing illegal aliens.
In enforcing this provision, the Wage and Hour Division works closely with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
In fiscal 1986, 132 farm labor contractors were cited for employing a total of 1,762 illegal alien workers.
A number of investigations which evidenced possible criminal violations of other statutes were referred to the Justice Department in fiscal 1986.
Employment and Training Administration, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, continued to coordinate programs and services that have an impact on migrant and seasonal agricultural workers.
Government contract enforcement concentrated on complaints alleging violations of the various laws that provide labor standards for employees performing government contract work.
During fiscal 1986, 4,690 investigations were conducted under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the Service Contract Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Back wages found due 51,097 workers under the provisions of these laws totaled $34.3 million.
Employers agreed to pay $26.4 million of these back wage amounts to 46,240 workers.
Additional monies were to be restored upon completion of administrative hearings or litigation action.
Pursuant to the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, 15,571 prevailing wage determinations were issued during the fiscal year.
Of this total, 1,798 were general determinations which apply to many construction contracts in a given geographic area, and 13,773 were issued for specific construction projects.
Improvements have been made in the process of collecting wage data for use in making Davis-Bacon wage determinations.
One such improvement involves the publication of a manual containing updated wage survey methods.
Various alternatives for further improvements to this process, including automation, continue to be explored.
General wage determinations are issued under the Davis-Bacon Act .
The publication of these general wage determinations has been shifted from the Federal Register to a Government Printing Office (GPO) publication titled General Wage Determinations Issued Under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts.
This publication is available on a subscription basis with weekly updates.
The Wage and Hour Division newly issued or revised over 3,930 determinations of prevailing wages and fringe benefits for a wide variety of job classifications under the Service Contract Act.
In addition, wage determinations were issued for application to approximately 40,677 contracts.
On the regulatory front, one reform issue remaining to be resolved is the Department's revised rules which would allow for an expanded use of semi-skilled helpers on Davis-Bacon projects.
Initiated in 1982, these provisions were challenged in court and deferred.
On appeal, the courts upheld the Department's authority to expand the use of helpers, provided certain.
The Department intends to implement new helper provisions that will comply with the rulings of the courts.
A number of bills were proposed in this session of Congress to increase the threshold for Davis-Bacon coverage.
The Administration supports raising the current $2,000 threshold to $1 million on military construction and $100,000 on other construction.
The House Subcommittee on Labor Standards of the Committee on Education and Labor held hearings in September 1986 to examine the Davis-Bacon Act, with the stated purpose of reporting out a reform bill during fiscal year 1987.
The Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) continued to streamline management of its field offices in its three programs during FY 1986.
In the Division of Federal Employees' Compensation (DFEC), longstandińg backlogs were eliminated, field office management roles were redefined, and intensive management training was developed for line supervisors.
In the Longshore program, implementation of an automated data processing system took place during the year.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation (DCMWC) upgraded its automated data processing capabilities through conversion to a new services contractor at the start of the fiscal year.
The office further emphasized cost-savings, program integrity, and the elimination of fraud, waste and mismanagement.
Major efforts to reemploy disabled federal employees continued.
Through.
In the Longshore program, rehabilitation saved $3.2 million in compensation costs.
In February 1986, the Longshore program published final regulations implementing the amendments to the Longshore Act, signed by President Reagan on September 28, 1984, making important changes in benefits.
The revised regulations also permit debarment of medical providers to ensure the integrity of the program and increase penalties for fraudulent actions.
DFEC collected $14.4 million in third-party payments and over-payments to beneficiaries.
DCMWC recovered $20.4 million from responsible coal mine operators and insurance carriers, and from overpaid beneficiaries and medical providers.
An additional $5.3 million in accounts receivable were settled through waivers and write-offs.
The Division of Federal Employees'Compensation (DFEC) emphasized the importance of good field office management by requiring district offices to conduct quarterly internal reviews of office operations.
These reviews follow systematic procedures which mirror the external accountability review process so that each office can determine its weaknesses and address them through such means as employee training.
A medical fee schedule was implemented on June 9, 1986, affecting physician and laboratory bills for services provided to injured workers.
The automated system compares the billed cost to a maximum allowable fee schedule which reflects both the complexity of the service and medical cost in the geographical area where service was performed, and pays for the service only up to the maximum.
Providers receive a detailed description of the fee reductions with procedures for appeal.
The cost effectiveness of this control is being studied.
DFEC will shortly publish final revisions of its administrative regulations, the first such revision since regulations were issued implementing the extensive 1974 legislative amendments.
Many administrative changes are being designed to improve monitoring of employee injuries, to encourage offers of light duty and modified work, and to spell out employees' rights to due process.
In September, the program completed implementation of its agreements with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to provide FEC data for federal injury reporting.
Henceforth, the agencies will provide coded information concerning place of injury, occupation of the employee, type and source of injury in submitting the initial claim which DFEC will in turn provide to OSHA and employing agencies, enabling better monitoring.
As part of its ongoing service to agencies, DFEC produced a self-instructional advanced training course for agency personnel who assist injured employees in filing and supporting claims.
The new course builds on the basic course by addressing more complex issues in managing an effective workers' compensation program in an agency.
Avoiding interruption of income to injured workers remained a major focus.
District offices are required to report quarterly on the percentage of wage loss claims paid within 14 or 45 days, and program standards were to be put into effect beginning in fiscal 1987.
Data gathered from the claims tracking system will be used to identify areas where processing is slow, as in claims for recurrence of disability due to older injuries.
DFEC automated its accounts receivable and debt management operations, and further implemented the provisions of the Debt Collection Act.
The automated system calculates and applies interest on eligible debts, generates information for reporting to credit bureaus and collection agencies, issues monthly bills, and provides reports for managing accounts receivable to district office fiscal managers.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation continued decentralization.
Review of diagnostic billings and the adjudication of Certificates of Medical Necessity (CMNs) were transferred from the national office to district offices closer to the claimants' homes.
The division also completed the decentralization of Medical Benefits Only claims to district offices.
Adjudication of CMNs is used to approve durable medical equipment, including home oxygen, home nursing services, and pulmonary rehabilitation treatment.
The review and processing of medical determination billing prior to authorizing payment serves to improve the quality of the tests, to increase timeliness, and control related costs.
During fiscal year 1986, the division received 6,324 new claims and 2,956 refiled claims.
Decisions were made on 9,863 claims.
At the end of the fiscal year there were 3,025 claims pending an initial decision.
The division also held 851 informal conferences and forwarded 5,337 claims to the Office of Administrative Law Judges (OALJ) for formal hearing.
The OALJ returned 8,235 decisions and orders to the division for review and necessary action.
Additional workload included maintenance of approximately 67,000 Medical Benefits Only claims, 88,974 Trust Fund monthly payments claims, 7,372 claims in interim pay pending a final resolution of the employer's challenge to the claimant's eligibility, and 4,114 claims in which responsible mine operators were paying monthly benefits.
As a result of debt management activities, the Black Lung division recovered more than $20.4 million from responsible coal mine operators, insurance carriers, beneficiaries, and medical providers.
Referrals to credit bureaus, collection agencies, and the Department of Justice were implemented under the Debt Collection Act of 1982.
Overpayments of $5.3 million were settled through waiver or were written off as uncollectable.
Approximately $585 million was paid in benefits to coal miners, eligible survivors, and medical providers.
Of this amount, approximately $495 million was paid to miners and their survivors as monthly benefit payments.
In February 1986, the Longshore program published final regulations implementing the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act Amendments of 1984.
During the early months of fiscal 1986, public comments on the interim final regulations were evaluated.
The final regulations implement important changes provided for in the 1984 amendments.
The major provisions of the amendments clarify and limit the Act's jurisdiction, make changes in benefits, establish a method of providing benefits for victims of latent disabilities due to occupational disease, and provide additional safeguards against abuse such as increased penalties for fraud.
An automated case management system was implemented in all of the Longshore program's district offices in fiscal 1986.
This was the first automated system developed for use by the Longshore program.
The Longshore Case Control Subsystem provides case tracking and transaction recordkeeping on all lost-time and death claims received by the Longshore district offices.
It also furnishes the claims processing staff with a means of reviewing each claim as it proceeds through the administrative review and adjudicative process.
The Longshore Correspondence/Word Processing Subsystem generates automatic correspondence to be sent to various parties involved in a specific case.
The Longshore Management Information Subsystem will provide workload and management statistical information, pertinent to the overall operation of the Longshore program, individual district office effort, and claims examiner effort.
The first two subsystems were implemented and were operational in all of the district offices in fiscal 1986.
The Longshore Management Information Subsystem is being programmed and tested and is scheduled to be operational in all district offices in fiscal 1987.
The automated case management system has assisted in more timely case creation, case review and responses to inquiries and, in general, has provided for a more efficient workflow in the district offices.
Another major automation project completed in fiscal 1986 was the redesign and conversion of the Special Fund Benefit Pay and Assessment System from a separate, time-shared, contractor-owned/operated computer to an in-house Longshore program-owned microcomputer.
The redesigned system provides increased capability and implements many of the recommendations from a recent audit report of the Office of Inspector General.
During fiscal 1986 approximately 41,200 lost-time injury reports were received and processed and 6,000 informal conferences were held.
During a typical month in fiscal year 1986, 19,400 maritime and other workers covered under the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and its extensions, or their survivors, were receiving compensation payments.
The OWCP Division of Vocational Rehabilitation concentrated on the quality and timeliness of its services during fiscal 1986, thereby assisting many injured workers to become self-supporting and reducing compensation costs.
This year a national reemployment program was implemented with the Department of Commerce.
Other reemployment programs facilitated the return to employment of workers injured under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
These efforts were under way in the Postal Service, the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Army.
A pilot rehabilitation study was developed with the Jacksonville, Philadelphia, and San Francisco district offices, involving cases covered by the Federal Employees' Compensation Act and the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
The study began October 1, 1986, for a period of one year.
Through this study, OWCP will attempt to increase the number of injured workers successfully rehabilitated and identify a model system of service delivery that results in the highest number of injured workers returned to work without sacrificing the delivery of quality and timely services.
The division recruited, selected, and provided training in OWCP policy and procedures for approximately 84 additional contract rehabilitation counselors.
They are paid by OWCP to provide testing, evaluation, counseling, guidance, placement and follow-up services to injured workers.
During the year, 622 injured Federal workers under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act were rehabilitated, saving more than $12,530 per worker in compensation costs.
Total savings for the year were $7.8 million in compensation costs.
Also in fiscal 1986, 263 injured workers in the private sector were rehabilitated under the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, for savings of more than $12,141 per worker in compensation costs.
As noted previously, total compensation costs saved for the year were $3.2 million.
In DFEC, standards for the development and adjudication of claims and effective case management have been enforced to assure that claims are processed in a timely manner and in accordance with the laws and regulations.
Wage-Hour and OFCCP compliance officers has been successful in reducing the number of claimants on the rolls who are no longer eligible for benefits.
Through Memoranda of Agreement with the Office of Personnel Management, OWCP and OPM matched beneficiary rolls to identify recipients of prohibited dual benefits, and achieved better mutual procedures for offsetting benefits to collect debts.
Also in DFEC, the first and second lists of excluded medical providers were transmitted to the field offices and disseminated among employing agency offices.
A process of reconciling accounts for the annual charging of benefit costs to the employing agencies was developed, and training in reconciliation was provided to fiscal officers.
DCMWC participated with the Social Security Administration and State and Federal agencies in computer matching to ensure integrity of monthly benefit payments to black lung beneficiaries.
The division continued to work closely with the OIG on active investigations in several regions of some medical providers and others suspected of fraud.
DCMWC continued to implement procedures for improving security to minimize fraud within the claims process, as well as conducting periodic audits which will ensure the integrity of the benefit payment system.
Emphasis continued toward the overall reduction of accounts receivable through improved debt management.
During FY 1986, OWCP began referral of consumer delinquent debt to a private collection agent.
Broader use was made of automated accounts receivable systems in the DFEC and black lung programs.
Through its Divisions of State Employment Standards Program, Legislative Analysis and State Workers' Compensation Programs, the Office of State Liaison and Legislative Analysis continued to provide assistance to the States and to coordinate Federal-State activities in the areas of workers' compensation, labor standards, and equal employment opportunity.
The Division of Legislative Analysis developed Congressional testimony and background materials on affirmative action for federal contractors, industrial homework regulations under the Fair Labor Standards Act, and reform of the Davis-Bacon Act.
The evolution of the Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Anti-terrorism Act of 1986 was closely followed because of the possibility of double compensation of Federal employees under that Act and the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
The potential problem was solved in the House-Senate conference on the bill.
The Division prepared reports on Congressional bills on product liability and tort reform, occupational disease and parental and medical leave for short-term disabilities.
None of those proposals was enacted.
Lastly, Congressional efforts to reform immigration laws were monitored and reported, as were developments related to occupational disease legislation and proposals to require granting parental and medical leave for short-term disabilities to employees.
DLA also developed issue papers for legislative decisions and regulatory materials required under Executive Orders 12291 and 12498.
In addition, the Division coordinated the preparation of the Employment Standards Administration's submissions .
The Division of .
State Employment Standards Programs furnished expertise on State labor standards laws and programs that impact on or are affected by ESA programs.
The Division developed considerable information on State employment standards, such as the relationship between State law and the proposed new rules for industrial homeworkers, developments in the State prevailing wage field in relation to regulatory changes under the Federal Davis-Bacon Act, and increases in State minimum wage rates above the FLSA rate.
In promotion of improved Federal/State coordination of similar programs, DSESP served as catalyst and facilitator in the consideration of proposed ESA/State agreement for cooperative activities among similar programs.
The Division of State Employment Standards Programs provided technical advisory assistance and information on numerous labor standards subjects in response to some 1,800 requests from State labor departments and legislatures, management organizations, multi-State employers, organized labor, other Federal agencies, the Congress and others.
Throughout the year, the Division maintained active working relationships with State governmental labor officials and their organizations, and participated in several regional and national čonferences of State officials.
In serving as a national clearinghouse of information on State legislative developments, DSESP reviewed and analyzed about 1,200 labor bills and new laws and prepared annual and biennial articles on State trends for publication.
The Division of State Workers' Compensation Programs analyzed 172 enacted workers'compensation amendments from 669 proposed amendments during fiscal 1986.
From this information, it prepared its semiannual publication, State Workers' Compensation Laws, as well as numerous informational charts and tables.
The Division provided on-site technical assistance to nine State workers' compensation agencies in the implementation or improvement of their information systems.
In conjunction with the International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commissions, the Division updated its in-depth profile on the administration of each State workers' compensation agency for inclusion in the publication, State Workers' Compensation Administration Profiles.
The Division of State Workers’ Compensation Programs provided technical assistance and information to State workers' compensation agencies, legislative committees and commissions on a continuous basis and worked closely with five States in arranging and participating in workers' compensation conferences for educational purposes and/or to focus on issues for possible legislative changes.
Fiscal year 1986 saw a decrease in the number of deaths and injuries in the mining industry, compared with the previous year.
Metal and nonmetal mining reported 50 fatalities, the lowest total ever for a fiscal year, and coal mining had 92 deaths, the third lowest fiscal year total.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) conducted several special accident-reduction programs.
One target for special emphasis was coal mines employing relatively few miners, which statistics show account for a disproportionate number of deaths in the industry.
MSHA took action to alert small mine operators to the hazards and to make them aware of the different kinds of assistance available.
Agency officials convened a number of informational meetings in the coalfields and distributed training materials.
The agency also expanded the campaign with industry and labor to address the problem of alcohol and drug abuse in mining.
MSHA developed an audiovisual program consisting of slides and a script describing recent accidents in which substance abuse played a role.
By the end of the fiscal year, a videotape and other materials on substance abuse were being prepared for release to the mining industry.
In August 1986, MSHA began a special effort to alert coal miners and operators to the dangers of methane explosions.
Using the mobile explosion test gallery, agency specialists put on 24 demonstrations for a combined total of 8,500 people by fiscal year's end.
Also in the coal sector, MSHA continued its investigation into the disastrous fire that killed 27 miners at the Wilberg Mine near Orangeville, UT, on December 19, 1984.
The in-mine portion of the investigation was completed on August 29, 1985; following complete analysis of the findings, the agency will publish its final report in FY 1987.
In the metal and nonmetal sector, specialists in MSHA's Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) worked closely with 25 operations having injury rates significantly higher than the national average.
During fiscal year 1986, PAR operations achieved a 38 percent reduction in lost workdays and a 25 percent reduction in their injury incidence rates.
As part of the Metal and Nonmetal activity's internal control program, evaluations were conducted of mine safety enforcement practices in the Western and Rocky Mountain Districts.
MSHA continued its comprehensive review of the metal and nonmetal mining standards.
Final rules for mine ground control, loading, hauling, and dumping, and machinery and equipment were near publication at the close of the fiscal year.
During fiscal year 1986, MSHA assessed civil penalties for more than 100,000 violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act and of mandatory safety and health standards.
During fiscal year 1986, there were 2,640 underground coal mines and 3,921 surface mines and facilities under the jurisdiction of Coal Mine Safety and Health (CMS&H).
The division conducted 45,561 inspections and investigations as well as 3,270 education and training activities at underground operations.
There were 18,408 inspections and investigations and 1,293 education and training activities at surface mines and facilities.
A total of 106,242 citations and withdrawal orders were issued to coal mine operators and contractors for violations of safety and health regulations.
More than 1,600 health and safety inspection close-out conferences were held at the request of operators and labor representatives.
There were 92 coal mining fatalities in FY 1986, the third lowest fiscal year total in history.
This total compares to 102 fatalities for FY 1985.
The fatal incidence rate was .06 deaths per 200,000 employee work hours in FY 1986, about the same as in FY 1985.
For fiscal year 1986, the incidence rate for all types of injuries in coal mining declined to 4.98 per 200,000 employee hours from 5.12 in FY 1985 and 5.48 in FY 1984.
The average number of coal mining employees (excluding office workers) was 180,688 in fiscal year 1986 as compared to 192,000 in fiscal 1985.
The Coal Mine Safety and Health Division investigated 218 complaints by miners who were allegedly fired or otherwise harrassed by mine operators for exercising their statutory right to call attention to safety and health dangers where they work.
The Division also opened 25 investigations into possible knowing or willful violations of coal regulations.
In an effort to provide more effective health protection for the miner and involve coal mine operators in the process of collecting samples when reduced dust standards are in effect, CMS&H developed and implemented in FY 1986 a revised quartz dust enforcement program.
This program allows operators and miners to be more actively involved when a potential quartz problem exists.
Specifically, it enables mine operators to participate, on a voluntary basis, in the collection of dust samples for quartz analysis, the results of which are subsequently used in the reduced dust standards process.
The revised quartz program allows for the use of multiple samples to more accurately adjust the dust standard, for automatic reevaluation of the current applicable standard, and for mine operators and miners' representatives to request special surveys by MSHA to determine if quartz is present in the work environment.
Coal mine safety and health specialists also established during FY 1986 a revised inspector noise sampling strategy.
The main thrust of the new strategy is to conduct full-shift mine surveys instead of short-term surveys on coal miners, in order to better assess miners' exposure to noise in the workplace.
Another important aspect of this new procedure is to recognize the use of personal hearing protection devices for the purpose of compliance where noise exposures are not adequately reduced through the use of current engineering controls.
Participation of coal miners in the X-Ray Surveillance Program has steadily declined over the past several years.
During fiscal year 1985, MSHA training specialists gathered information from hundreds of miners to determine why they have or have not taken advantage of the free x-rays to detect the presence of pneumoconiosis (black lung disease).
This information was sent to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health for compilation and review.
The purpose of this study is to develop a film or video tape on the x-ray program to inform miners and mining-related organizations of the program and about the possible health effects of lung disease.
During fiscal year 1986, the CMS&H division continued activities of the Roof Evaluation-Accident Prevention (REAP) program, including informational meetings, media coverage and the distribution of audio-visual materials, posters and stickers.
In addition, MSHA expanded the Non-Fatal Days Lost (NFDL) Accident Reduction Program to an all-mine Accident Prevention Program.
The expanded program includes all mines rather than only specific mines.
The NFDL rate for underground mines at the end of fiscal year 1986 was 7.47 per 200,000 employee hours, a decrease from the 1985 fiscal year rate of 7.89.
The NFDL rate for surface mines and facilities was 3.70, a decrease from 5.15 in FY 1985.
MSHA education and training specialists working in Coal Mine Safety and Health field offices, offered programs at mine sites across the country.
For example, they initiated a special emphasis program to determine miners' competency in the use of the self-contained self-rescuer (SCSR) in case of an emergency.
The education and training specialists assist mine operators in identifying problems at a particular ·mine, evaluate and monitor mine operators' training plans and help to organize chapters of the voluntary Holmes Safety Association.
Five accidents resulting in multiple fatalities were investigated during the past fiscal year.
On December 11, 1985, a methane explosion occurred at the No. 2 Slope, M.S.W. Coal Co., in Pennsylvania, resulting in three deaths.
The following day, December 12, two miners were killed in a nearby mine when workers drilled into explosives during development of the Buck Mountain Slope, Mountain Top Coal Co.
On February 6, 1986, three coal company.
Two other miners died when lightning struck near the blast area of the High Power Energy 20-Mile Surface No. 901 Mine in southern West Virginia on June 28, 1986.
The last multiple fatality of FY 1986 occurred on July 9, 1986, at the Freeman United Coal Mining Co.'s Orient No. 6 Mine when a roof fall killed three foremen.
Recovery was completed of the area of the Wilberg Mine in Utah where fire killed 27 miners in December 1984.
All electric equipment and cables in the fire area were removed from the mine for further investigation.
This equipment was meticulously examined and tested and many components were sent to specialized laboratories for further anàlysis as part of extensive data collection and study supporting eventual publication of a definitive report of the accident.
In fiscal year 1986, MSHA's Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health activity was responsible for promoting safety' and health at some 419 underground mines and 10,708 surface mines, quarries, sand and gravel operations, and mineral mills.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors and specialists operate from six district offices, 12 subdistrict offices, and 55 field offices throughout the nation.
This activity's workforce numbered 534 employees.
During the fiscal year, 18,699 complete regular inspections were made at metal and nonmetal mines and mills.
Another 981 regular inspections were made at mines that were not actively producing—for example, operations with crews performing only maintenance work.
Enforcement personnel also made 237 inspections or investigations in fiscal 1986 in response to hazard complaints.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors issued 29,341 citations and orders during the fiscal year.
Inspectors also made 5,979 compliance follow-up inspections to check for correction of previously identified violations.
A total of 921 other inspections were made at gassy mines, electrical installations, mines using hoist equipment, and mines engaged in shaft sinking.
At the request of management or labor, 293 health and safety post-inspection conferences were held with supervisory personnel to discuss inspectors' findings.
According to preliminary data, 50 fatalities occurred in metal and nonmetal mining during FY 1986—the lowest figure ever recorded for a fiscal year.
This compares to 68 deaths in fiscal year 1985.
The fatal incidence rate was .03 per 200,000 employee hours for fiscal year 1986, compared to .04 for FY 1985.
The all-injury incidence rate was 4.46 for FY 1986, compared to 4.24 for FY 1985.
The average number of employees decreased by 7,000 and employee hours decreased by about 5 million.
Metal and nonmetal mine training specialists conducted 560 classes, meetings and visits to mine sites during the fiscal year.
Special investigations were made in response to 58 complaints of discrimination as prescribed by section 105 (c) of the Mine Safety and Health Act and 147 possible knowing and willful violations involving corporate agents.
Special emphasis programs continued during the fiscal year included the Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) and Compliance Assistance Visits (CAVs).
The Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) included 25 mining operations having injury rates significantly higher than the national average at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Due to several mine closures, this number was reduced to 22.
Operations in the PAR program received extra attention in those areas found deficient through audits and review of the mine's safety program.
From October 1985 through June 1986, PAR operations achieved a 38 percent reduction in lost workdays due to injuries and a 25 percent reduction in their injury incidence rates.
Inspectors made 1,401 Compliance Assistance Visits (CAVs) at the request of mine operators to mines and mills that were opening for the first time, resuming operations, opening new sections, or installing new equipment.
Since these sites are not yet in operation, citations are not issued on these visits.
On the next regular inspection, inspectors check to make sure that any conditions noted on the CAV have been corrected.
During the fiscal year, inspectors wrote 9,310 notices at CAV visits.
MSHA provided guidelines for its metal and nonmetal mine inspectors covering the demolition of a structure containing asbestos, and the installation, stabilization, or removal of insulation and other asbestos material.
The guidelines included sampling and identification procedures, applicable MSHA standards, and notification of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Mercury exposure has become of increasing concern in gold and silver mining.
In order to make operators aware of the problem and to provide information on engineering controls for mercury sources, MSHA has organized a technical team which has been evaluating possible controls and will produce a pamphlet.
Lastly, as part of the Metal and Nonmetal activity's internal control program, evaluations were conducted of mine safety enforcement practices in the Western and Rocky Mountain districts.
The Office of Standards, Regulations, and Variances continued to review major groups of mine safety and health regulations.
These reviews will bring MSHA's regulations up to date, clarify them, close gaps, remove needless burdens, and make the rule book easier to use.
To achieve its aims, MSHA worked· to identify any duplicative or unnecessary standards.
It sought to provide alternative means of compliance and to incorporate technological advances.
Other goals include eliminating incorporations by reference and reducing the burden of recordkeeping and reporting on mine operators.
Included in its comprehensive review of the metal and nonmetal mining standards, the Standards Office held public hearings to discuss the gassy ine standards in October 1985; final rule development was close to completion at the end of the fiscal year.
Additionally, final rules for ground control, loading, hauling, and dumping, and machinery and equipment were near publication at the close of the fiscal-year.
Proposed rules were being prepared on three more metal and nonmetal sections: those on explosives, electricity, and air quality.
On November 11, 1985, MSHA published a preproposal draft of its radiation standards, and a proposed rule was near .
The review of underground .
MSHA published proposed rules for roof control on October 15, 1985, and explosives and blasting on May 9, 1986.
As part of the same review, preproposal drafts of the ventilation standards were available to the public on November 19, 1985, and electrical standards May 23, 1986.
Public hearings were held on the roof control proposals in February 1986.
MSHA continued to review .
Using this procedure, the manufacturer could then certify that specific technical requirements were met.
In the area ,of equipment approval, the agency also published a proposal for updating fees associated with agency approval of mining equipment on April 16, 1986, and conducted public hearings on these two proposals in July and August 1986.
The proposal for the approval of explosives and sheathed explosive units was near publication at the end of the fiscal year, as were proposals addressing the implementation of the statutory provision covering “"pattern of violations" and proposals establishing a mine plan appeal process.
The agency continued to review regulatory issues affecting the use of diesels in underground coal mines.
During fiscal year 1986, MSHA assessed civil penalties for 129,924 violations of mandatory safety and health standards, a figure consistent with fiscal 1985.
Total penalties assessed were $12 million, a five percent increase over the previous year.
Collections increased from $9.6 million in 1985 to $10.1 million in fiscal 1986.
This represents 85 percent of the civil penalties assessed without any need for collection action.
Penalties that become past due are referred to a commercial collection agency under contract with thè agency.
Penalties that are not collected are referred to the Office of the Solicitor for enforcement in Federal court.
Assessments continued to be issued promptly: All citations were reviewed for consistency and completeness before issuance of the civil penalty assessment.
Mine operators requested hearings with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on 3,418 violations, 2.6 percent of the total assessed.
This represents a slight increase over the previous fiscal year.
During fiscal year 1986, Technical Support personnel responded to, or assisted other MSHA personnel in the investigation of, three mine emergency situations.
In addition, Technical Support continued to furnish technical assistance at the Wilberg Mine.
This consisted of on-site gas analysis, monitoring of analytical instrumentation installed in the mine, and laboratory testing of material recovered from the fire area.
Technical Support personnel conducted more than 530 in-mine and field investigations during FY 1986.
Included were 73 investigations and studies of ground or roof control problems, 96 noise control investigations, and 55 ventilation studies.
Also, non-destructive tests of 57 separate hoist ropes at 24 locations resulted in recommendations that six hoist ropes be removed from service.
The acquisition of the latest state-of-the-art non-destructive testing equipment greatly facilitated the hoist rope testing program.
Technical Support processed more than 123,000 respirable coal mine dust samples received from mine operators or from MSHA inspectors as part of mine inspections.
Additionally, 2,120 respirable dust filter cassettes were examined and weighed as part of MSHA's Quality Control Surveillance Program of filter cassettes supplied to the mining industry.
In addition to the respirable dust samples, approximately 17,000 other samples were analyzed in Technical Support laboratories.
These included mine gas samples, mineral samples analyzed for quartz content, samples of liquids from mines, and analyses for fiber content and asbestos determinations.
During the fiscal year 120,000 occupational accident, injury, and illness reports were processed and analyzed with results being distributed to MSHA management and the mining industry.
Seven reports analyzing specific accident types or trends were published, as were 12 pictorial Hazard Alerts.
In a major move, the MSHA accident and injury data systems were transferred from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) computer facility in Boulder, CO, to the Department of Energy Idaho National Engineering Laboratory (DOL/INEL) facility at Idaho Falls, Idaho.
The transfer was accomplished without major interruption in the MSHA accident and injury data processing operations.
The MSHA Approval and Certification Center completed 4,674 approval actions on new application requests received from manufacturers mining equipment, materials, and instruments.