American workers enjoyed another good year in 1987, but challenges lay ahead.
More Americans were working than ever before.
New records were set in the number of persons in the labor force, as well as in the number of those actually working.
By the end of the 1987 fiscal year, there were 115 million Americans at work.
Nearly 14 million new payroll jobs had been created since the economic expansion began nearly five years earlier—an average of almost 250,000 jobs a month.
The majority of these new jobs were in higher-paying occupations, with major growth in managerial, professional and technical specialties.
The proliferation of new jobs helped raise the status, and increased the number employed, among blacks, Hispanics and women, groups many of whose members had been disadvantaged in the past.
It was also a good year for working men and women as inflation continued under control.
This meant that the wage gains and purchasing power of workers were protected, and a day's wages continued to buy a bountiful basket of goods and services for most Americans.
For those still outside the economic mainstream, the Department provided some $1.9 billion in employment and training block grants to the States benefitting more than 1.3 million men, women and youths during the latest program year.
An additional 216,000 dislocated workers received training, relocation or placement help from Department funds.
With the Department of Health and Human Services, the Labor Department initiated a Youth 2000 project that would mobilize Federal, State and local resources to attack the problem of "at risk"youths.
The changes taking place in the kinds of jobs Americans do and in the composition of the labor force were detailed in a study done for the Department, "Workforce 2000: Work and Workers in the Twenty-first Century,"made public in July 1.
To raise public consciousness about these changes and about the improvements that would be necessary in our educational system to meet the skills requirements of the 21st Century, a Workforce 2000 Project Office was established in the Department.
The Workforce 2000 study outlined a promising economic future, but there were major challenges to be met, the report said.
The study showed that workers of the future would need stronger educational backgrounds to take advantage of the new opportunities.
More and more, the jobs of the future would place a premium on reading, reasoning, communication and mathematical skills.
People without these skills would be unable to hold down the majority of the jobs of the future; and the Nation faced the creation of a possible permanent underclass of unemployed and unemployable men and women if the situation remained unchanged.
With a school dropout rate nearing 50 percent in some cities, and with many youths graduating from high school only marginally literate, clearly something had to be done.
The Workforce 2000 project was funded through the Department's Employment and Training Administration, which also developed four legislative initiatives during the fiscal year to improve U.S. work force training, education and employment.
Among them were a proposed new worker readjustment program to replace and considerably enlarge two existing programs, and a training initiative to help youths receiving Aid to Families of Dependent Children to break the cycle of welfare dependency.
Both were included in the Administration's proposed Trade, Employment and Productivity Act, designed to strengthen America's ability to compete in the world economy.
Despite the continuing surge of new workers into the labor force, the number of job-related deaths dropped in the 1986 calendar year, which included the first three months of the 1987 fiscal year.
Periods of rising employment usually bring a rise in workplace deaths and injuries because inexperienced workers are more prone to workplace accidents.
The fact that this did not happen indicated that employers and employees, alike, were paying more attention to job safety.
For those relatively few employers refusing to heed the safety message, the Occupational Šafety and Health Administration levied large fines against a number of companies during the year.
The Department continued to encourage companies and workers to practice safety voluntarily, and at the same time to enforce the Occupational Safety and Health Act fairly and equitably.
There was a drop in coal mining fatalities to an all-time low of 63 deaths for the 1987 calendar year.
This was the third time in five years that a new low was set.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration also began a broad re-evaluation of its policies and practices to increase its effectiveness in protecting the health and safety of the Nation's miners.
Termination of a growing number of pension plans by employers, and other actions to recapture the excess assets of plans, became a growing problem during the year.
The Department continued to advocate Congressional action to protect more fully the retirement benefits of 30 million working Americans and retirees covered by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
These reforms, which were enacted after the fiscal year ended and were signed into law by President Reagan on December 22, 1987, became a major victory on behalf of American workers, retirees, responsible employers, and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
As enacted in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987, the revised rules would require employers with underfunded pension plans to make additional pension contributions starting in 1989 and to pay increased premiums to PBGC beginning January 1, 1988.
Such plans must also provide a number of other protections designed to prevent plan terminations and to ensure that participants received their full promised benefits.
In general, ERISA has worked well to ensure that the pension promises made to millions of American workers and their families are kept by American employers.
That success, however, had been threatened by inadequate funding standards and termination rules that encouraged employers to terminate plans and unload unfunded pension liabilities on PBGC.
The 1987 legislation reduced the opportunities for employers to jeopardize benefit promises through systematic underfunding of liabilities.
During the year, the Department took important steps to improve enforcement of employment standards.
The Employment Standards Administration began inspecting employer eligibility verification documents required by the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.
The immigration reform act also significantly revised the H-2 temporary agricultural worker program, administered by the Department's Employment and Training Administration.
In the largest private sector minimum wage and overtime pay settlement in the history of the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Department obtained a consent decree providing up to $6.8 million in back pay for 28,000 former employees of Hudson Oil and affiliated companies who had worked at service stations in 28 States.
The Employment Standards Administration also completed its final regulations under the 1985 Fair Labor Standards Act amendments, providing coverage of the Act for State and local government employees, and it revised its recordkeeping requirements under the Act.
During the year, the Bureau of Labor Statistics continued efforts to improve the quality of data it provides for labor, management, the academic community, other government agencies, and the general public.
Most significant of these improvements was the revisions of the Consumer Price Index to bring it more closely in line with current consumer spending patterns and economic conditions.
Reflecting the increasing influx of women into the labor force, the Department cosponsored a major national conference on work and family issues.
Sessions explored ways to help workers meet both their workplace and their family obligations through more flexible work, leave and other arrangements.
The problems of women workers continued to be a major concern of the Department's Women's Bureau throughout the year.
Among other new initiatives throughout the Department, an executive microcomputer network was designed, developed and procured to improve communications at the top levels of the Department.
Looking toward the future, the Department prepared to mark its 75th anniversary on March 4, 1988.
À year-long series of public events was planned, including symposia on labor issues and future directions, a forum featuring former Secretaries of Labor, and a banquet commemorating the anniversary.
All living former Secretaries of Labor and officials of labor, management and government, as well as former and present Department employees, were to be invited to the banquet, scheduled for March 10, 1988.
These and the other scheduled events were designed to show the public how the Department has served American workers over the decades, and to point toward even better and broader services in the future.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA), the Federal agency with lead responsibility for the Government's job training programs, focused much of its energies during the Program Year 1986/Fiscal Year 1987 period on preparing the work force to meet the requirements of jobs of the future.
To this end, the agency did staff work on four major legislative initiatives, including a new Worker Readjustment Program, that were included in the Administration-proposed Trade, Employment and Productivity Act of 1987.
These and other initiatives formed part of the Workforce 2000 Project, established by the Secretary to help the nation's workers, employers, and policymakers prepare for the social and industrial changes of the 21st century.
The agency supported a major research study, "Workforce 2000: Work and Workers for the Twenty-first Century," which provided valuable insights into what must be done to take full advantage of the demographic, occupational, and economic trends that will shape the U.S. during the remainder of this century and beyond.
ETA worked to improve the effectiveness of its existing services to client groups and devised experimental programs and other efforts to deal with Workforce 2000 issues, particularly workplace literacy.
Some ETA programs operate on a program year basis, others on a fiscal year cycle.
The information on agency activities is presented accordingly, for PY 1986 (July 1986-June 1987) and FY 1987 (October 1986-September 1987).
A major Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) initiative, "Youth 2000,"was launched in June of 1986, bringing the Departments of Labor and Health and Human Services together to focus State and local attention on opportunities and challenges facing the nation and its young people through the end of this century.
ETA regional offices worked with State and community leaders to stimulate public awareness of youth-related issues and begin a dialogue, the first step in mobilizing resources to address problems associated with ‘at-risk"youth, including illiteracy, drug and alcohol use, teenage pregnancy, and unemployment.
JTPÀ authorizes the largest federally funded job training program.
PY 1986 activities under its various titles follow.
Adult and Youth Programs.
More than 1,328,300 participants were enrolled in State and local programs under Title II-A of the Job Training Partnership Act in Program Year 1986, and expenditures totaled $1.9 billion.
Title I-A provides for a system of block grants to the States to support training and employment programs for economically disadvantaged youth and adults.
States retain 22 percent of the, funds for statewide activities, and allocate the balance of their grants to local service delivery areas (SDAs), the districts into which the nation is divided for JTPA administrative purposes.
SDA expenditures for the 12-month period totaled $1.6 billion, with more than 40 percent spent on services to youth 16 to 22 years of age.
More than 90 percent of the participants in SDA programs were economically disadvantaged, and females and minorities accounted for 52 and 50 percent of participants, respectively.
Twenty-seven percent were high school dropouts, and 26 percent were receiving welfare.
Seventy-one percent of the adults who left SDA programs entered employment at an average hourly wage of $5.02.
Youth terminees had a positive termination rate of 79 percent.
Summer Youth Programs.
Summer Youth Employment and Training Programs (SYETP) under Title ⅡI-B of JTPA provide economically disadvantaged youth with job opportunities, training, and educational services during the summer months.
SDAs expended a total of $637 million for the 1987 program which served approximately 626,400 youth.
The 1986 JTPA amendments relating to SYETP were implemented for the summer 1987 program.
The new summer program model is designed to combine work experience with remedial education and/or vocational exploration and requires the identification of participants who do not meet locally determined educational standards.
Youth who fall below these standards may be enrolled in a remedial education component as part of the summer program to provide them the basic skills needed for regular academic work during the school year.
Dislocated Worker ·Programs.
Sixty-nine percent of the some 139,700 participants who left the program during the period entered employment, at an average hourly wage of $6.36.
Expenditures totaled more than $192 million, $134.4 million of which was from formula allotments to the States.
The remaining dollars were spent on special projects funded from the Secretary's discretionary account.
These projects are proposed by Governors and for the most part are directed toward specific groups of dislocated workers, usually those affected by one or more plant closings.
Discretionary projects assisting workers from the agriculture, food processing, mining, electronics, oil and gas, and communications industries were among those funded in PY 1986.
Native American Program.
Employment and Training Programs for Native Americans, authorized by JTPA Title IV, continued to support a wide variety of services through grants to Indian tribes, other Native American communities, and various related organizations in PY 1986.
The 12-month period saw: The continued promotion of literacy projects and of linkages between Native American grantees and other human resource programs; approval of 11 grantee community benefit projects; design of a new, model-based method for setting performance standards; provision of onsite technical assistance by a private contractor to 25 grantees; designation of 188 grantees for Program Years 1987 and 1988; and sponsorship of four seminars for grantees on program and financial management.
Approximately 33,900 Indians and other Native Americans were served at a cost of $59.6 million.
In terms of services, 30 percent of the participants received classroom training, 10 percent received on-the-job training, 22 percent were in work experience, 6 percent were in community service employment, and 32 percent received various supportive services.
Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Program.
Initiatives launched under the Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker (MSFW) Program during PY 1986 included the development of: (1) partnerships between farmworker program operators and private industry leading to the development of customized job training; (2) linkages between grantees and labor union locals to utilize apprenticeship training programs; and (3) guidelines for acceptance of newly-legalized agricultural workers into MSFW programs.
The farmworker program is authorized under Title IV of JTPA.
Grantees were instructed to refer eligible farmworker youth to Job Corps centers, in the continuing effort to coordinate farmworker projects with other human resource programs.
In addition, 95 percent of the program's grantees have formal agreements with private institutions, such as vocational centers.
Youth employability enhancement was another focus of PY 1986 operations, and 8,200 farmworker youths aged 14-21 (18 percent of the total participants) participated in such activities.
The overall program served 45,222 persons at a total cost of $57.7 million during the year.
Nearly 9,000 participants received classroom training; 7,800 were placed in on-the-job traning; and 1,800 were placed in work experience positions.
Job Corps.
During Program Year 1986, the Job Corps operated 105 training centers at a cost of $630 million, providing a wide range of training, education, and support services, primarily in residential centers, for disadvantaged youth aged 16 to 21.
Job Corps is also authorized by Title IV of JTPA.
Average enrollment at any time during the year was 39,300, and Job Corps centers served approximately 65,000 new enrollees during the period.
The majority of Job Corps centers continued to be 100 percent residential, but 46 centers operated combined residential/nonresidential programs.
Nonresidential enrollment was 9.9 percent during the program year.
Major efforts focused on implementation of a series of pilot and demonstration projects designed to identify ways to increase program outcomes and reduce costs.
This initiative, referred to as "Job Corps II,"includes such activities as the establishment of two nonresidential Job Corps centers, and a project that will increase selected centers' capacity through the operation of evening classes, enabling enrollees to hold part-time jobs while in training.
In addition, the Job Corps II initiative focuses on the development of stronger programmatic linkages between Job Corps centers and local JTPA programs, arrangements with State agencies to obtain child care for corpsmembers with dependent children, and efforts to enhance services to foster care youth.
The evaluation of another pilot project, which studied the value of serving older enrollees (age 22 to 24), was completed during the year.
The evaluation report indicated that older enrollees can benefit significantly from Job Corps.
This age group had greater educational gains (reading and math), higher GED (high school equivalency) attainment, and higher vocational training completion than younger corpsmembers.
The report concluded that the project was successful and recommended that the program be implemented nationwide through an adjustment in the Job Corps age eligibility criterion.
The Job Corps GED program was revised to accommodate a new writing skills test which will be incorporated into the GED test battery.
In addition, a residential living task force was established to identify ways to enhance the social skills development of corpsmembers, and evaluation of a pilot computer-assisted instruction project in Job Corps'basic education program got underway.
Services for the Disabled.
ETA directed training and employment projects for the handicapped through grants totaling nearly $3.6 million in PY 1986.
Grant recipients were organizations representing individuals with specific barriers to employment—sight and hearing problems, epilepsy, mental retardation, and other physical and emotional impairments.
Authorized under Title IV of JTPA, the projects enrolled 7,900 persons during the year.
Performance Standards.
A number of important changes were made in the performance standards management system during PY 1986.
Levels for five of the seven Title II-A national standards were revised to reflect recent program experience.
The revised standards concerned placement rates for adults, youth, and welfare recipients; adult placement costs; and the positive termination rate for youth.
Data on Title II-A participants' employment, earnings, and job retention three months after leaving the program were collected as a first step toward the development of post-program performance standards.
For Title III programs, a first-time national performance goal for placement was established.
Two technical assistance guides were published.
One provides updated information to help States set local Title II-A standards that account for SDA differences in participant characteristics and labor market conditions.
The other provided information to assist States and SDAs in collecting post-program data on Title I-A enrollees.
Training conferences covered these and related subjects.
For Title IV programs operated by Indian/Native Americans and migrant/seasonal farmworkers, ETA developed and introduced individual grantee standards which include use of a statistical model.
Training on the new model-based approaches was held for grantee staff at various sites across the country as part of the PY 1987 planning cycle.
Individual standards measuring corpsmembers' success in earning GEDs and showing gains in reading/math were also issued for each Job Corps center.
In addition to these individual measures, Job Corps has three national standards that gauge job placement and retention for three and for six months.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP) provided part-time jobs for more than 95,000 older persons in PY 1986, with an appropriation of $312 million.
A number of activities during the year were designed to enhance the effectiveness of the program.
For example, efforts got underway to identify and address the literacy needs of older workers and to plan and design programs that focus on serving the older work force in the year 2000.
ETA also continued emphasis on coordinating SCSEP activities with those of other employment programs, particularly with sponsors of JTPA's 3 percent set-aside for older workers and with the Job Corps.
SCSEP is authorized by the Older Americans Act of 1965.
Fiscal Year 1987 marked the golden anniversary of the Department's administration of the National Apprenticeship Act (the Fitzgerald Act).
During the year, 332,718 registered apprentices—including 96,255 new ones—received training in 47,121 programs.
Female apprentices represented 6.4 percent of the total and minorities 20.1 percent.
The National Apprenticeship System also includes some 50,000 active apprentices in programs sponsored by the United States Armed Forces.
ETA launched a major initiative to thoroughly review the apprenticeship concept as a means of providing training for a skilled work force over the next decade.
And the year saw closer cooperative efforts between apprenticeship and vocational education programs as mandated by the Carl D. Perkins Vocational Education Act.
The majority of States established apprenticeship/vocational education steering committees in response to a joint letter sent to each governor by the Secretaries of Labor and Education.
A directory of State steering committee contact representatives was prepared.
Ás part of an on-going effort to improve the quality of training, Federal staff reviewed on-site and provided technical assistance to over 1,800 apprenticeship programs.
ETA also prepared the final report of a nationwide review of apprenticeship related instruction.
The report provides uniform information regarding State laws and regulations, identifies areas requiring further review, and indicates where follow-up action is needed.
The Department assumed responsibility for the Colorado apprenticeship program, required when the State legislature ceased providing funds and repealed the State apprenticeship law.
Progress was made in implementing an on-line apprenticeship data system—the Apprenticeship Management System— which provides information useful for efficiently operating the program and directing program priorities to better address future skilled work force requirements.
ETA continued its efforts to adapt the National Apprenticeship System to changing technological developments by approving as apprenticeable additional occupations (examples are radiation monitor, telecommunicator, and air and hydronic balancing technician), encouraging sponsors to consider performance-based/compentency-based programs, and revising apprenticeship standards to keep them current.
During Program Year 1986, 19.2 million persons registered with the public employment service; 7.0 million received some job-related services; and 3.7 million applicants were either placed in a job or obtained one after receiving some services.
Labor exchange expenditures for the period totaled approximately $750 million.
State employment service agencies continued to assist in the administration of the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program, whose authorizing legislation had expired on December 31, 1985.
Legislation reauthorizing TJTC was enacted in October 1986, but was retroactive to January 1, 1986.
State agencies processed employer requests for TJTC certification for the retroactive period along with current ones, and many States simplified procedures to facilitate the processing.
The new TJTC law reduced the maximum first year tax credit claim from $3,000 to $2,400, eliminated the credit claimed for wages earned during the second year, and established a 90-day employee retention period employers must observe before claiming the credit.
The U.S. Employment Service and its affiliate State agencies administer a foreign labor certification program under which 29,655 applications for permanent and temporary labor certification for nonagricultural jobs were approved in FY 1987.
In calendar year 1986, some 23,600 temporary agricultural jobs were certified to be filled by nonimmigrant foreign workers.
The Employers'National Job Service Committee coordinated activities of about 1,200 local Job Service Employer Committees and 40 State committees, involving over 30,000 employers from all types and sizes of firms.
The national group's objective is to focus applicant services toward employer needs.
States listed some 65,000 new jobs with the Interstate Job Bank as "hard-to-fill"locally during PY 1986.
About half of these listings were professional and managerial positions, and about 11,000 applicants were referred to them.
The Interstate Job Bank sends information weekly on almost 15,000 job openings to over 2,000 locations.
Although the information goes to most States via computer tape-to-tape transmittal, by mid-1987 it was transmitted electronically to 13 States.
About 1.6 million individuals were registered for the Work Incentive (WIN) Program in FY 1987, through both regular and demonstration programs.
An estimated 277,000 of these persons found unsubsidized jobs and 158,000 earned enough to be removed from welfare rolls.
WIN's budget for the year totaled $133 million.
WIN's objective is to restore Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) applicants and recipients, and their families, to economic independence and enable them to assume a useful role in the community.
Approaches used by States to achieve this include job search, work experience, on-the-job training, vocational and other classroom instruction, and supportive services.
Regular WIN programs are jointly administered by the Department of Labor, through ETA, and by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), through the Family Support Administration (FSA).
At the State level, regular WIN programs are managed jointly by the State employment service and the State welfare agency.
States may also choose to conduct a WIN demonstration program which is administered solely by FSA and the State welfare agency.
By the end of FY 1987, 29 States (including the District of Columbia) operated demonstration programs, while 25 States (including Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands) continued to operate regular WIN programs.
The WIN population differs substantially from the mainstream work force.
Of the WIN client group, 79 percent are women, 54 percent are minorities, and slightly more than half have less than 12 years of school.
During calendar year 1986, 19.7 million initial claims for unemployment benefits were filed with State Employment Security Agencies.
There were 111.9 million weeks compensated for total unemployment and 9.6 million weeks compensated for partial unemployment during the same period.
Fiscal Year 1987 saw improvement in State benefit financing and repayment of loans from the Federal Unemployment Trust Fund.
These loans had peaked as of March 31, 1984, when 26 States had outstanding loans totaling $14 billion.
During FY 1987, lower rates of insured unemployment and improved financing structures combined to permit many States to make voluntary repayments, in lieu of or in addition to recoveries occurring by way of the reduced Federal unemployment tax offset credit to employers.
As of August 31, 1987, seven Štates had unpaid loans.
The balance of outstanding loans had been reduced to $3.9 billion ($2.5 billion interest free and $1.4 billion interest bearing).
Monthly borrowings during FY 1987 ranged from a high of $266.6 million in March 1987 to a low of $26.0 million in August 1987.
Trust fund balances of States not in debtor status as of June 30, 1987, amounted to $23.3 billion.
ETA continued several important UI initiatives during the fiscal year: specifically, improving the program's integrity and testing ways to accelerate and smooth the transition to reemployment for UI recipients, especially the long-term unemployed.
Under the integrity initiative, ETA continued the development and implementation of a comprehensive, integrated approach to improve the accuracy and timeliness of UI program activities, including the collection of revenues and the payment of benefits.
The principal component of this effort is the UI Quality Control (QC) system.
States also directed attention to ongoing program integrity activities and techniques to identify and eliminate problems before they occur.
By the end of the fiscal year, 30 States had installed the Model Crossmatch System and 36 States were operating the Model Recovery System.
These systems were developed to better identify potential fraud cases and increase the amount of overpayments collected.
Approximately $297 million in overpayments were estimated and more than $136 million recovered during the fiscal year.
The secretary issued the final regulation to establish the permanent QC program on September 3, 1987, with an effective date of October 5, 1987.
Now mandatory for all States, the program initially covers intrastate payments in the regular UI program and the federally funded programs of Unemployment Compensation for Ex-servicemembers and Unemployment Compensation for Federal Employees.
Other elements of the QC program (e.g., interstate payments, extended benefits programs, benefit denials, and revenue collections) were to be phased in later.
Three distinct options for incorporating benefit denials into the QC program were pilot tested in five States (Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Louisiana, Iowa, and Washington) during FY 1987.
Data collected will be used to evaluate the methodology employed and determine the feasibility of incorporating this aspect of the UI benefit payment process into the QC program.
Another project operated by the Idaho employment security agency tests collecting data on the validity of selected payments by telephone, rather than by in-person interview.
The purpose is to determine if the required degree of accuracy can be obtained by the less costly telephone contacts and thereby save resources.
Agreements were reached with Florida, Missouri, Arkansas, and' Colorado to further test data collection by phone to obtain experience in States with varying characteristics.
The second initiative concerned improving the ability of displaced workers to adjust more rapidly and effectively to the changing demands of the labor market and to smooth the transition of UI claimants to suitable work.
To this end, a series of demonstration projects was initiated to test the feasibility of identifying potential UI exhaustees early in the benefit period and providing several forms of reemployment assistance to facilitate their return to work.
The assistance, not previously available to UI recipients on a regular basis, was targeted to individuals likely to exhaust their UI entitlement and have difficulty finding new work.
The New Jersey Unemployment Insurance Reemployment Demonstration Project examined the effectiveness of using the UI system to identify displaced workers early in their unemployment spells and testing early intervention strategies.
The cost effectiveness of three alternative packages of services that utilize job search assistance, training, relocation assistance, and a cash bonus for early reemployment were examined.
Eligible claimants were identified and provided services through the coordinated efforts of the UI, ES, and JTPA systems.
The demonstration began operation in July 1986, and by the end of the project 15 months later, more than 7,000 claimants had been offered services.
According to an interim report, the demonstration services resulted in an overall impact on UI benefit payments of 0.64 fewer weeks paid, or a reduction of about 10 percent in the usual duration of an individual's spell of unemployment.
This translates into a reduction in benefits of just over $100 per eligible claimant.
This reduction is for all project enrollees, not just for participants who used the reemployment services.)
Although complete data were not available by year's end, it appeared that the size of the impact was such that one or more of the three alternative packages of services tested would prove cost-effective in the final analysis.
As refinements of the New Jersey project, the States of Pennsylvania and Washington were selected to operate demonstrations to further explore the effectiveness of offering claimants a cash incentive for early employment.
The State of Washington was also selected to conduct a self-employment demonstration project as a part of the ongoing UI effort to explore alternative ways to utilize the UI system to deal with structural unemployment problems.
The concept of self-employment as an alternative use of UI had not been tried in the United States.
Essentially, this demonstration involves making available to claimants who make efforts to become self-employed all or a part of the UI benefits they would receive while looking for a job.
A total of 1,877 petitions for assistance were filed with the Department under the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) Program during Fiscal Year 1987, a 7 percent increase over the number received the previous year.
Some 115,350 workers who lost their jobs or whose hours of work were reduced because of increased imports were certified as eligible to apply for TAA benefits and reemployment services, compared with about 93,130 workers the prior year.
Many of these workers were separated from employment in firms manufacturing apparel, electronics, footwear, and automobiles.
During Fiscal Year 1987, an estimated $212 million in trade readjustment allowances (TRA) was paid to certified workers, compared with $116 million during the previous fiscal year.
Nearly $50 million of TAA program funds were allocated for worker training, job search, and relocation assistance in FY 1987.
The figure was $30 million in FY 1986.
The TAA progrām has been considerably modified since it was originally authorized by the Trade Act of 1974.
Most recently, the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (P.L. 99-272), enacted on April 7, 1986, extended the TAA program to 1991.
It added the requirement of worker participation in a job search program—a job search workshop or job finding club—where reasonably available, as a condition for receiving TRA payments.
It also changed the number of weeks of employer-authorized leave credits to satisfy the TRA qualifying requirement of 26 weeks of employment, and extended the period in which a worker can receive basic TRA from 52 to 104 weeks without increasing the total number of weeks TRA is payable.
Policy and planning activities during PY 1986 supported the goal of the Workforce 2000 effort: increasing the productivity of the American work force so it can compete in the 21st century.
ETA prepared policy options on human resource policy and competitiveness for the President's Economic Policy Councils and subsequently did the staff work on four major legislative initiatives that were included in the Trade, Employment and Productivity Act of 1987 which was transmitted to the Congress in February 1987.
The four proposals were a new Worker Readjustment Program (WRAP), an initiative for yearround training of AFDC youth under JTPA, a refocus of the public employment service, and an unemployment insurance administrative financing initiative.
ETA conducted briefings on these initiatives, and Department officials testified at several hearings held on them.
The proposed WRAP was included in legislation that passed the House and Senate, and included such approaches as early intervention, labor/management committees, and closer cooordination between training services and payment of unemployment compensation.
The AFDC youth initiative was incorporated in Senate-passed legislation.
ETA also participated in the development of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA), and was involved in implementation of this landmark legislation.
Department officials testified at Congressional hearings a number of times during the development of IRCA.
In the changing U.S. economy, employers will be demanding workers with higher levels of literacy and basic skills who can readily adapt to new technology and work requirements.
Thus, workplace literacy took on renewed importance in ETA's policy agenda, and a series of 14 demonstration projects was designed and implemented to test new methods and administrative arrangements for delivering literacy training to young and adult workers.
The work skills of disadvantaged populations were also enhanced through a series of demonstration projects with the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
These "coordination"projects tested new ways to link local JTPA service providers with local social service agencies and, in the process, provide more comprehensive and effective services to clients, particularly "at-risk' youth, such as juvenile offenders and disabled, homeless, and Indian youngsters.
At the State level, four more coordination projects jointly funded with HHS attempted to demonstrate how the integration of services, through a variety of organizational reforms, could expand the level and array of services provided to disadvantaged persons.
The organizational reforms included the unification of planning, needs assessment, and evaluation functions of relevant agencies; colocation of service delivery and related transportation operations; improved control of services through case management; and the development of uniform application and eligibility determination procedures.
Participation in a number of congressional oversight and legislative hearings on such subjects as the future of the work force, reauthorization of the Older Americans Act, Job Corps, veterans' employment and training programs, JTPA, and welfare reform.
ETA directed a major portion of its research and evaluation resources to support the Secretary's initiatives for Workforce 2000.
Recent studies conclude that the bulk of labor force entrants between now and the year 2000 will consist of groups that have traditionally been underutilized or have experienced labor market barriers—women, minorities, and immigrants.
At the same time, the employment base of the economy is changing in structure from manufacturing to services.
Accordingly, the emphasis in research and evaluation increasingly is on ascertaining the effectiveness of ongoing programs, what is needed to improve the delivery of services, and the relevance of training to key target groups and changing economic environments.
To monitor program participation on an ongoing basis, ETA continued to fund the Job Training Quarterly Survey (formerly known as the Job Training Longitudinal Survey), which provides data on JTPA Title II-A and III participant characteristics.
Data for PY 1986 show that JTPA is serving the intended clientele: more than 90 percent of Title II-A enrollees are economically disadvantaged, over 40 percent of enrollees are youth, and slightly more than half are females.
As part of its responsibilities for research and evaluation, ETA launched a major field experiment to measure the net impact of diverse JTPA Title I-A treatments (such as classroom training and on-the-job training) on participants.
The five-year study focuses on the post-program labor market experience of JTPA participants and includes random selection as part of its classic experimental design.
A major research study, completed in PY 1986, identified labor force and job market changes likely to occur over the next decade and beyond.
The final study report, "Workforce 2000: Work and Workers for the Twenty-first Century,' pinpointed demographic, employment, and economic trends the nation will confront in the labor market of the future.
Another study was funded to identify the best practices in selected areas of training and development that would be useful to employers and trainers in both the private and public sectors.
ETA continued to focus on problems of youth through support for Cities in Schools, a program to encourage publicprivate community cooperation to combat school dropout and other problems of at-risk youth.
Involvement of private industry counsils (PICs) is increasing as the program spreads to new sites.
The demonstration Summer Training and Education Program (STEP) continued to combine part-time employment with competency-based remedial education and 'life skills classes.
JOBSTART, another demonstration project, also provided remedial education, skills training, and other assistance to school dropouts.
A key feature of the STEP and JOBSTART programs is significant funding from private foundations.
Other nationally administered pilot, demonstration, and multi-State programs provided training and other employmentrelated services to special-needs groups, such as the handicapped, youth, displaced homemakers, single parents, older workers, and persons of limited English-speaking ability.
Research was conducted on the employability and employment of handicapped and older workers, including cooperative research with labor organizations and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
A study of the effects of labor-management relations on organizational efficiency, with implications for international competitiveness, was also initiated.
ETA regional offices conducted compliance reviews in all States in PY 1986.
The process involved approximately 400 State reviews and some 750 visits to sub-State areas.
The reviews are designed to reveal deficiencies and problems involving the failure of a State or local program to conform to Federal requirements.
PY 1986 reviews covered six categories: JTPA administrative and financial management issues, JTPA program management and services, the summer youth program, JTPA Title III reserve account, employment service base grants, and employment service reimbursable grants.
The first two categories were particularly broad ones.
Under JTPA administrative and financial management issues, reviewers looked at systems for participant data, financial/cash management, and procurement; audit resolution/debt management; grievance procedures; and performance standards.
Under the JTPA program management and services category, regional staff reviewed planning and policy, monitoring systems, eligibility determination, and councils, all at the State level.
At the sub-State level, they examined Title II-A programs, programs for older persons, State education coordination and grants, and Title III formula programs.
Compliance reviews were initiated in 1984 to coincide with the start-up of JTPA, and included employment service activities.
The surveys conducted in PY 1984 and PY 1985 focused on key statutory provisions and requirements.
The system was restructured for PY 1986 to reduce the number of visits by Federal staff to States and sub-States areas.
In the process, some compliance guides were eliminated and others were consolidated.
Although the closeout of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) reduced the number of incoming audits, ETA issued final determinations, decisions, and responses to waiver requests for 113 audits during Fiscal Year 1987.
Year 1987.
During the same period, 325 contracts and grants funded by the national office were closed.
Approximately 295 actions remained pending for reasons such as appeals of contract or grant officer determinations, unresolved audit issues, pending debt collection actions, or pending requests for the establishment of indirect cost rates.
3) a compliance review system that identifies areas in which States must take corrective action.
This latter system was restructured to reduce the number of onsite visits to States and coordinating visits.
ETA collected approximately $18 million in cash for debts established primarily through the audit resolution process, and more than $21 million in debts were referred to the Department of Justice for litigation or other debt collection followup.
In addition, ETA recovered for the Federal UI Trust Fund over $10 million for debts established through the UI Federal share audit resolution process.
During the same period, 21 internal control reviews, surveys, and management reviews were conducted in the process of carrying out ETA's responsibilities under the Federal Managers'Financial Integrity Act.
More than 600 pre-award reviews were completed on potential ETA contractors or grantees, and 33 investigations, either internal or external, were conducted to determine compliance with the applicable legislative and regulatory requirements.
Approximately 600 incidents of alleged fraud, abuse, or other criminal activity were reported through the ETA Incident Report system or the General Accounting Office/Office of Inspector General Hotline system.
Corrective action was initiated when appropriate.
Onsite reviews were conducted independent of program office activities on a sample of 35 national office programs.
These reviews focused on program operations and financial systems.
The primary issues identified were misclassification of costs, lack of cost allocation plans, inadequate documentation for verification of participant eligibility, and failure to follow government travel regulations.
The appropriate program office initiated requests for corrective action where necessary.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) took several steps during the year to assure continued excellence in essential statistical series.
Capping a multi-year effort to update and improve the accuracy of one of the nation's most important economic statistics, the Bureau introduced a revised Consumer Price Index.
Significant improvements in the Employment Cost Index contributed to its growing acceptance as the most authoritative measure of changes in the cost of wages, salaries, and benefits.
The Bureau also expanded the National Survey of Professional, Administrative, Technical, and Clerical Pay to provide the broadest coverage ever for the annual Federal pay comparability process.
An extensive outreach training program helped thousands of employers to better understand the new Recordkeeping Guidelines for Occupational Injuries and Illnesses.
The Bureau assumed responsibility for the National Longitudinal Survey of Labor Market Experience.
Contracts were awarded to fund research using the data generated by these surveys.
In support of the Secretary's Workforce 2000 initiative, the Bureau issued new labor force, economic, and industry and occupational projections for the 1986-2000 period.
Productivity measures were refined and extended.
Progress included labor productivity measures for the Government sector and additional multifactor measures.
As part of the initiative to develop indexes for the service sector of the economy, the Bureau published an import price index for oil tanker services and an export price index for airline passenger services.
The Bureau also published Employment Cost Indexes for eight additional service sector industries and for the goodsproducing and service-producing sectors at the aggregate level.
The Bureau issued six industry labor productivity measures and continued developmental work on price, productivity, and wage measures.
Activities in this program area emphasized the development of new data to reflect the evolution of the nation's economic structure and improvements in the quality and timeliness of data reporting.
The Bureau continues to monitor the situation of workers whose jobs were abolished through the displaced workers supplement to the Current Population Survey, first administered in 1984, repeated in 1986, and planned for 1988.
Another Bureau program addressing structural dislocation—the Permanent Mass Layoff and Plant Closing system—issued its first official estimates during the year.
BLS also conducted a special study of the results of layoff actions and advance notice of plant closings for the Secretary's Task Force on Economic Adjustment and Worker Dislocation and launched a survey of employer-provided child care benefits.
In the Current Employment Statistics program, seven more States began telecommunicating data to the Bureau, bringing to 45 the number of States using this process.
The new data transmission system has increased usable reports each month by 10 to 20 percent.
Work also continued on testing Computer-Assisted Telephone Interviewing and respondent Touchtone Data Entry self-reporting.
CATI has demonstrated the ability to improve the quality and timeliness of data collection over the current shuttle-mailing techniques, and TDE is expected to help control data collection costs.
Publication of the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification Manual—the first significant revision of the U.S. industrial classification system in 15 years—necessitated a major effort to develop coding materials, train coders, and instruct State and Federal officials in the use of the new classification system.
A joint Federal/State research project tested the feasibility of using regression-based models for developing monthly labor force estimates at the State level.
The test results were encouraging.
The Bureau also began the installation of a microcomputer-based estimating system for local area statistics in the State offices.
At the end of the year, the system was operational in six States.
Bureau staff discussed employment and unemployment data improvements during the year in several papers given at the annual meeting of the American Statistical Association.
Topics included research to improve the quality of Current Employment Statistics, the survey processing and management system for Occupational Employment Statistics, and an evaluation of concurrent seasonal adjustment techniques for labor force data.
The Bureau also hosted the Second International Roundtable of Business Survey Frames, presenting a paper evaluating new employment insurance accounts as a sample frame for business births.
The Bureau continued to make labor market data available to other government agencies, the press, academia, and the general public through its regular publications.
The Monthly Labor Review published major research articles on the duration of joblessness, the labor force and disability status of Vietnam veterans, the growing diversity of work schedules, multiple jobholding, overtime work, work at home, temporary help, and preferences for varying combinations of work' and earnings.
Shorter reports appeared in the MLR on subjects as diverse as the work experience of the 1985 high school class, military versus civilian wives in the labor force, occupational earnings, youth unemployment, the minimum wage, and the impact of changing industrial structure on the unemployment rate.
Culminating a multiyear effort, the Bureau began issuing a revised Consumer Price Index in 1987.
The revision was completed on schedule and within budget.
The revised index reflects the spending patterns of the population for the 1982-84 time period, replacing the former 1972-73 reference period.
The revised index is more accurate than the one it replaces.
It is based on a new sample of urban areas, incorporates new items such as video cassette recorders and day care, and uses an entirely redesigned sample of housing units to provide better estimates of changes in consumers'shelter costs.
The revision effort introduced a wide variety of improvements in index construction techniques and a complete redesign of the supporting computer system.
Senior BLS staff made a large number of technical presentations on the revision, including special user conferences in 13 major metropolitan areas.
Several technical bulletins and articles were published on the revision.
These public information efforts, both prior to and at the time of the first release of the revised index, contributed to public understanding of the effort and materially lessened the difficulties of users in making the transition from the old to the new index.
In addition to its regular publication of annual estimates of consumer expenditures and income, the Consumer Expenditure Survey program developed an improved survey questionnaire for introduction in 1988.
The new questionnaire was the result of extensive ongoing evaluation of data quality and data collection techniques.
In addition, new methods for improving questionnaire design and data quality, which rely on approaches used in the cognitive sciences, were explored at a conference sponsored by BLS.
The Producer Price Index program instituted a systematic resampling process to maintain series reliability by updating the products and company reports to reflect changes in the structure, membership, technology, or product mix of an industry.
The Bureau introduced the first input price indexes with publication of Producer Price Indexes for material inputs to construction industries.
Under the initiative to develop indexes for the service sector of the economy, the International Price program developed new indexes for exported air passenger service and imported oil tanker service.
The Producer Price Index program is developing indexes for the transportation and communications areas.
The Bureau expanded its survey of Professional, Administrative, Technical and Clerical Pay to provide the broadest coverage to date.
The 1987 survey included all private industries (except farms and households) and establishments with as few as 50 employees in nonservice industries and 20 employees in services.
BLS responded to a Congressional request to design an even broader survey of white-collar pay and benefits, a survey that could eventually replace the PATC pay survey.
Using funds provided by the Congress, the Bureau conducted extensive field tests needed to plan such a survey.
As requested, BLS reported its plans (including implementation schedules and cost estimates) to the Congress on August 13, 1987.
A number of developments in 1987 contributed to the growing acceptance of the Employment Cost Index as the most authoritative measure of changes in the cost of wages, salaries, and benefits.
The Bureau produced several new ECI series, including wages and compensation changes for workers in hospitals, banking, insurance, and business services.
The new series resulted from a Bureau-wide service sector expansion begun two years earlier.
For the first time, BLS published compensation cost levels from the ECI, fulfilling requests from a variety of users, including the Bureau's Business and Labor Research Advisory Committees.
The publication of these levels closed a data gap that had existed since the Employer Expenditures for Employee Compensation survey was discontinued in 1977.
The Bureau initiated publication of benefit cost indexes.
These indexes provide another tool for policy analysis and cost escalation.
For example, the Department of Defense will use benefit cost indexes as escalators in long-term contracts.
For the first time, the Federal pay comparability process used the ECI, updating 1986 data from the PATC survey for industries not included in that survey in 1987.
The ÈCI also became an integral part of the proposed design of the new white-collar pay and benefit survey, requested by the Congress.
The Bureau gained substantial sampling efficiencies by introducing a new method of occupational selection in the ECI.
The new procedure shortened the time required to collect wage and benefit data in sample establishments, thereby reducing individual respondent burden.
BLS expanded and strengthened the ECI's quality management program to accommodate its growing sample size and increased number of detailed series.
In addition, the Bureau implemented a structured system of wage and benefit data review.
For the first time, the Bureau included in its employee benefits survey paid leave and employee insurance and pension plans in State and local governments.
The survey has analyzed benefit trends in private medium and large firms since 1979.
In addition to an annual bulletin about the survey, BLS published Monthly Labor Review articles on (1) trends in defined benefit pension plans, (2) characteristics of mental health care coverage, and (3) long-term disability insurance.
The Bureau's occupational and industry wage survey programs boasted several improvements.
BLS continued activities to convert the area wage program from 70 to 90 areas, using the 1984 metropolitan area definitions published by the Office of Management and Budget.
The Bureau's work for the Employment Standards Administration's use in administering the Service Contract Act included first-time studies of (1) forestry activities in two Southern States, (2) air transportation in Alaska, and (3) unlicensed employees on deep sea tankers.
The timeliness of Industry Wage Survey reports continued to improve, and the temporary-help services industry was added to the program.
The Bureau analyzed and evaluated for publication the responses to questions asked on contracting-out services in eight manufacturing industries and on technology advances in the insurance industry.
Data compiled and analyzed in the Bureau's collective bargaining and industrial relations program were published in several news releases and in the monthly periodical, Current Wage Developments.
The Monthly Labor Review examined key bargaining situations scheduled for the year and gave information on deferred wagè changes and potential cost-of-living adjustments.
BLS further strengthened and expanded the program of measurement and analysis of productivity and technology—topics of substantial public interest.
Productivity measures are widely regarded as major indicators of U.S. economic progress, and the Bureau refined and extended the series of published measures to provide broader coverage.
The number of industries for which BLS published labor productivity measures was expanded to include the following: beauty and barber shops; poultry dressing and processing; mining machinery; retail liquor stores; and furniture, home furnishings and equipment stores.
A total of 146 separate productivity measures now are issued for industries in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
The Bureau also made progress in measuring productivity in the Government sector.
The productivity measures for the Federal Government were updated to cover fiscal year 1985.
These measures currently cover fiscal years 1967 to 1985 for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies, representing 69 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
In addition, measures for several State and local government activities were updated.
BLS expanded the multifactor productivity program to include measures for each of the 20, 2-digit manufacturing industries.
Research to improve the measurement and interpretation of productivity change continued with studies on capacity utilization, factor prices, capital discards, and the ratio of hours worked to hours paid.
Work also progressed on the contribution of education and experience to productivity growth and the effects of research and development expenditures on productivity.
BLS papers at meetings of the American Economic Association featured this research as well as Bureau work on the relationship between productivity and capital, energy, and materials used.
In the international area, BLS updated trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 12 countries and continued research toward the development of multifactor productivity measures for Germany and Japan.
The measures of comparative levels of hourly compensation costs for production workers in 34 countries and 40 manufacturing industries and the series on international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in 10 industrial countries were updated.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
In response to substantial public interest, the Bureau continued to assess the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years were prepared for four additional major American industries—lumber and wood products, footwear, hydraulic cement, and wholesale trade.
As part of its regular biennial program, the Bureau published labor force, economic, and industry and occupational employment projections for the 1986-2000 period.
The projections were issued in a news release and in five articles in the September 1987 Monthly Labor Review.
The Bureau also completed work on the 1988-89 Occupational Outlook Handbook.
The Occupational Outlook Quarterly featured an article on matching interests and skills with the characteristics of occupations.
Other articles discussed the changes in employment growth rates and supply-demand conditions for teachers and computer professionals, opportunities in franchising, and the job outlook for employment interviewers and operations research analysts.
The periodical also included an article which presented a realistic view of the chances of playing professional sports as well as an article featuring the distribution of employment in specific occupations by State.
As part of its extensive outreach training program on the new Recordkeeping Guidelines for Occupational Injuries and Illnesses, the Bureau conducted approximately 200 training sessions attended by more than 12,000 individuals who represented companies with about 11 million employees.
This training was designed to establish consistency in employer recordkeeping practices and to improve the reliability and validity of reported data.
In a complementary effort, BLS provided technical assistance to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in its special audit of the injury and illness records of establishments in Massachusetts and Missouri.
The expert panel of the National Academy of Sciences' Committee on National Statistics completed and published results of its study of the quality of BLS occupational injury and illness statistics.
The report includes 14 specific recommendations for improving these statistics.
The Keystone Center initiated a one-year national policy dialogue on work-related illness and injury recordkeeping issues.
The dialogue group—consisting of representatives from BLS and other Government agencies, corporations, labor unions, academia, and Congressional staffs—exemplifies another effort to improve the occupational injury and illness statistical system.
The proceedings of the BLS-sponsored symposium, Towards Improved Measurement and Reporting of Occupational Illness and Disease, were published.
The symposium brought together experts in health and safety who focused on ways to improve the measurement and reporting of occupational illnesses.
BLS also continued to work with State health departments and various other agencies to strengthen the Occupational Safety and Health Statistics program.
To make occupational injury and illness data accessible to researchers, BLS added national annual survey estimates from 1976 to the LABSTAT data file.
In addition, national data from 1981 became available for purchase on microcomputer diskettes.
The Bureau reported results of the latest Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses in a news release giving national estimates of incidence rates and numbers of occupational injuries and illnesses by industry.
Detailed statistics by industry and size of establishment appeared in a subsequent bulletin.
A Monthly Labor Review article discussed occupational fatality estimates and causal characteristics.
Individual estimates were produced by 36 States and 4 territories.
The Bureau mailed survey forms to about 280,000 employers nationwide to collect annual survey data.
During the year, 33 States participated in the Supplementary Data System, which provides detailed data on the characteristics of work injuries and illnesses based on State workers' compensation records.
State microdata files for selected years are available from the National Technical Information Service.
NTIS also makes available standard SDS tabulations that show distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by industry and occupation.
Work Injury Reports released during the year included Injuries to Longshore Workers and Chemical Burn Injuries.
Surveys in process included heat burn injuries, injuries involving heavy construction equipment, injuries involving industrial machines in manufacturing, and injuries and illnesses involving inhalation of toxic or noxious substances.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health use results of work injuries studies to evaluate and develop safety standards, compliance strategies, and training programs.
The Bureau pursued its long-term plan to establish an integrated microcomputer-based Local Area Network.
Upgrading network software and hardware to enable all BLS microcomputers to communicate.
Transmissions of electronic mail, data, and other information among BLS staff around the country became routine.
Developing and implementing microcomputer-based production systems used by both program and administrative offices.
Establishing microcomputer hardware and software standards.
BLS defined its microcomputer procurement requirements within the scope of a limited number of large scale contracts, thus reaping the benefits of lower unit cost prices for this equipment.
The pace of electronic publishing accelerated during the year as more program offices submitted manuscripts, tables, and charts via Local Area Network mail and diskette.
The Bureau's newest publishing mode—data on diskette—received good public response.
Sales of BLS diskettes grew rapidly.
The number of subscribers to our online electronic news service also increased.
The Washington chapter of the Society for Technical Communication presented an Award of Excellence to the Monthly Labor Review.
Fiscal year 1987 marked a continuation of efforts by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to expand communication and cooperation and enhance the ability of government, labor and industry to improve working conditions in the nation's workplaces.
In addition to traditional efforts at standard setting and enforcement, OSHA began or continued a number of initiatives designed to encourage voluntary efforts to eliminate or control workplace hazards.
A number of new safety and health standards were finalized during the fiscal year and several hazards were the subject of proposed standards.
Inspection activities were highlighted by vigorous enforcement of safety and health standards.
Record high penalties were proposed as a result of the inspection of IBP, Inc., that found many alleged willful violations of requirements to record worker injuries.
Training and education efforts were stepped up in recognition of the importance of such programs.
Consultation visits to employers, particularly small employers without staff safety and health expertise, continued to be a valuable adjunct to OSHA's inspection programs.
OSHA's Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) were expanded to recognize the excellent safety records of several companies added to the roster of VPP participants, and OSHA continued to stress cooperation in its partnership with the states that operate their own safety and health programs.
During the year, OSHA continued its effort to develop standards that are protective, flexible, and cost effective.
A new final rule on Servicing Single Piece Rim Wheels in Marine Terminals is a good example of this effort.
Under the final rule, approximately 5,000 employees who service rim wheels at 400 marine terminals will be afforded the same protection as workers who perform similar operations in general industry.
OSHA also published proposed rules on Construction Standards for Scaffolds, Fall Protection, and Ladders and Stairs.
These proposals clarify existing unclear requirements, reorganize the standards into a more logical order and eliminate overlapping requirements.
The existing rules did not properly address leading edge construction, overhand brick laying or new fall protection systems such as positioning devices.
Final rules issued in September 1987 revise recordkeeping requirements for the construction and telecommunications industries.
The revised final rules will reduce the recordkeeping burdens on employers by allowing them to certify that regulatory requirements have been met, instead of preparing and maintaining extensive and burdensome records.
An interim final rule on Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response, issued in December 1986, protects employees engaged in cleaning up hazardous waste and workers responding to hazardous spills.
In the area of health standards, OSHA published a final standard on Field Sanitation.
Under the provisions of this standard, an estimated 471,600 hired farm workers engaged in hand labor in the fields of approximately 54,000 U.S. farms will be provided sanitation, drinking water and handwashing facilities.
OSHA limited its coverage to hand laborers because they are at greatest risk of disease from inadequate drinking water and sanitation facilities in the fields.
As the result of a decision of the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, on August 24, 1987, OSHA published revisions to its 1983 Hazard Communication Standard.
These revisions expand the scope of the previous standard to include employers and employees in nonmanufacturing industries.
The revised standard also requires employers to provide information concerning hazardous chemicals to their employees by establishing hazard communications programs to include container labels, material safety data sheets, and training programs.
The primary purpose of the standard is to reduce the incidence of chemically related occupational illnesses and injuries in the workplace.
On September 11, 1987, OSHA published final rules amending the Benzene Standard.
The amendment reduced the permissible limit for worker exposure to benzene to 1 part per million parts of air (1 ppm) averaged over an 8-hour day and set a lowered short-term exposure limit (STEL) of 5 ppm over a 15-minute period.
The new standard also sets an action level of 0.5 ppm and requires exposure control methods, personal protective equipment, exposure monitoring, medical surveillance, training and other measures.
In FY 1987, OSHA conducted a total of 61,110 inspections.
During the fiscal year, the agency imposed the largest penalty ($2.6 million) in its 16-year history against IBP, Inc., for extensive violations of occupational safety and health recordkeeping requirements.
The citations resulted from an inspection of the meatpacking plant begun in January 1987.
OSHA also imposed a $1.57 million penalty against the Chrysler Corporation for 811 alleged instances of job safety and health violations.
These violations included overexposure of employees to lead and arsenic and serious deficiencies in the company's compliance with OSHA's hazard communication standard.
This standard requires that employees be notified of dangerous chemicals in the workplace.
The agency continued to emphasize the importance of maintaining proper workplace injury and illness records.
Such records are essential both for an employer's own safety and health program, and as the basis OSHA uses to target its inspections in the most hazardous workplaces.
OSHA continued its pilot program (begun in FY 1986) to help employers reduce back injuries, which account for an estimated one-fifth of all workplace injuries and illnesses.
Under the pilot program, OSHA inspectors checked for reports of back injuries whenever they consulted an employer's accident records, reviewed the employer's training program for lifting and other administrative and engineering controls, and offered whatever help the employer needed in training, job redesign or other measures.
To help address broad concerns for safety and health problems in the chemical industry, OSHA completed its Chemical Special Emphasis Program and submitted its final report to Congress.
A copy of the report may be obtained from the National Technical Information Service (NTIS).
OSHA has incorporated the systems safety inspection technique into its enforcement program and will make detailed and comprehensive audits of all workplaces that manufacture, store or use hazardous chemicals.
The Directorate of Field Operations was reorganized into an Office of Field Programs and a Directorate of Compliance Programs.
The Office of Field Programs (OFP) is responsible for day-to-day guidance to the field staff and for representing field concerns to the national office program offices.
OFP also ensures that the field offices have implemented all current national policies and procedures by conducting a national audit as well as a field performance analysis.
All other program activities formerly assigned to the Directorate of Field Operations will be handled by the new Directorate of Compliance Programs.
Federal agencies continued their efforts to achieve the President's goal of a three-percent reduction of injuries and illnesses per year for a five-year period.
In FY 1987, the fourth year after the goal was set, the program called for a cumulative reduction of 12 percent from the 1982 base year.
During the third quarter of FY 1987, 9 of the 15 largest agencies were meeting the President's goal: Tennessee Valley Authority, General Services Administration, Department of Interior, Department of Agriculture, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Department of Commerce, Veterans Administration, Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Department of Health and Human Services.
In the government as a whole, there was a cumulative 13 percent reduction in injuries and illnesses by the end of FY 1987.
OSHA developed a Federal Hazard Communication Program to implement its Hazard Communication Standard throughout the Federal sector.
Under the provisions of this standard, employers are required to inform and train workers about the hazardous chemicals in their workplaces.
The Federal Hazard Communication Program (FHCP) was unanimously approved by the Federal Advisory Committee on Occupational Safety and Health and 41 Federal agencies have agreed to participate in this program, including the 15 largest Federal agencies.
This number represents 97 percent of the entire Federal -workplace.
In conjunction with the FHCP, OSHA also coordinated Federal agencies’ participation in a cooperative technical assistance effort.
Members of the FHCP Technical Assistance Program published a guidance manual to assist Federal agency field managers in implementing the Hazard Communication Standard.
Members of this program also developed a generic hazard communication training program for Federal agencies to use to meet the training and information requirements of the standard.
In addition, OSHA provided assistance to Federal agencies in the areas of training, consultation, targeting, evaluations, enforcement, and incentive programs, and evaluated the occupational safety and health programs of the Departments of Labor and Air Force.
The 41st Annual Federal Safety and Health Conference was held in Chicago on October 20–22, 1986, in conjunction with the National Safety Council's Congress and Exposition.
There were more than 600 attendees at the conference, representing more than 40 agencies and 45 Federal Safety and Health Councils.
The conference provided a forum for presenting information and ideas that would assist the agencies in developing programs to help assure safety and health protection for Federal employees.
During FY 1987, OSHA continued to strengthen its partnership with the States.
Twenty-five States and territories are administering their own OSHA-approved State plans.
Twentythree plans cover both private and State and local government employment; two, Connecticut and New York, are limited in scope to employees of the State and its political subdivisions.
OSHA officials attended three meetings held by State plan officials to assure the States'continued involvement in policy initiatives and other matters of mutual interest.
Resuming limited concurrent enforcement authority in Virginia on October 1, 1986, with respect to general schedule inspections resulting in denials of entry.
The action was taken in response to Virginia State court decisions that rendered the State's right to conduct inspections without delay less effective than the Federal.
The concurrent enforcement authority was terminated on July 1, 1987, when corrective legislative amendments enacted by the Virginia General Assembly became effective.
Reinstituting concurrent Federal enforcement in California on July 1, 1987, to provide adequate occupational safety and health coverage for California's workforce.
On February 6, the Governor of California notified the Department of Labor of his intention to eliminate funding for the California occupational safety and health program and withdraw the State plan, effective July 1. Because of various court actions challenging the Governor's decision, the status of the plan remained uncertain at the end of the year.)
To ensure adequate protection for California workers, OSHA established three new area offices in addition to two existing ones in California, and detailed more than 100 safety and health compliance officers to California to conduct compliance inspections and to assure an orderly continuance of safety and health protection on the job.
Proposing to grant final approval to one additional State, South Carolina, which would bring the total to 13.
Final approval for the Indiana State plan was granted in FY 1986; for Arizona, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Tennessee, Utah, and Wyoming in FY 1985; and for the Virgin Islands, Hawaii and Alaska in FY 1984.)
Final approval reflects OSHA's judgment that, in actual operation, the State plan, is ‘"at least as effective'as the Federal program.
Approving the revised compliance staffing requirements (benchmarks) for the State of Nevada.
The benchmark revision approval was in accord with the terms of the Court Order in AFL-CIO V. Marshall (C.A. No. 74–406), and reflects current policies and State-specific information.
Continuing to actively coordinate with the 50 States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands to encourage their development of field sanitation standards and enforcement programs.
It was determined that the States'effort in responding to Secretary Brock's request for States to regulate field sanitation was insufficient; therefore, a Federal field sanitation standard was promulgated on May 1.
State plan States must now adopt a field sanitation standard that is "at least as effective"as the Federal field sanitation standard.
Establishing a Federal/State Task Force on the Federal Program Change System in response to the Occupational Safety and Health State Plan Association's (OSHSPA) request for changes in the present system.
The Task Force developed a draft chapter on plan changes to be incorporated into the State Plans Policy and Procedures Manual.
OSHSPA c nsidered the draft chapter and formally recommended its adoption to the Assistant Secretary.
A key OSHA goal is improved communication and coordination with employers and employees to supplement enforcement efforts.
The consultation program is one way OSHA assists employers in identifying and correcting hazards and in developing effective management systems for preventing workplace hazards.
Consultation services are provided primarily with Federal funds and at no cost to the employer.
Targeted mainly on smaller employers in more hazardous businesses, consultation may cover all or part of the workplace, depending upon the employer's request.
The service is administered by State government agencies or universities utilizing staff separate from enforcement.
The service is confidential and does not trigger a State or Federal inspection.
The service is penalty free, but employers are required to take immediate action to eliminate employee exposure to imminent dangers and to correct identified serious hazards within a reasonable time.
During FY 1987, OSHA conducted over 27,000 consultation visits.
During FY 1987, the first quarterly monitoring reports were issued to track consultation project performance in terms of serving smaller, high-hazard employers, identifying and assuring correction of serious hazards and other key performance criteria.
Consultants continued to provide employers with safety and health program assistance and training upon request.
The program for Inspection Exemption through Consultation continued, with 477 exemption certificates being issued.
These certificates were granted to small business employers who received a comprehensive consultation hazard survey, corrected all hazards identified, and demonstrated that an effective safety and health program was in operation.
In February 1987, the State of Louisiana signed a 7(c)(1) Cooperative Agreement with OSHA to provide consultation services to employers in that State.
There are now 7(c)(1) Cooperative Agreements in 46 States and jurisdictions.
Eight States provide consultative services under their State plans.
In its continuing effort to improve the cost-effectiveness and efficiency of the consultation program, OSHA placed a cap (20 percent of personnel costs) on Federal funding of indirect costs.
In addition, a proposal is under development that would place a cap on all overhead costs (both direct and indirect administrative expenses) associated with consultation program operations.
Uniform budget categories established in FY 1986 were defined in detail in FY 1987 allowing for comparative analyses of State budget submissions in support of this effort.
Consultants continued to support the OSHA special emphasis programs in the fireworks manufacturing industry and for trenching and ergonomics.
Assistance in developing effective safety and health management systems was emphasized in these cases.
OSHA held the first consultation project managers'conference in over five years.
The theme of the conference, “Consultation: Building a Network," promoted the sharing of technical assistance and support capabilities among all members of the OSHA family.
The Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) provide the opportunity for OSHA to expand its influence in the workplaces across the country beyond those targeted for enforcement.
Through VPP the agency reaches those companies that are fully committed to employee safety and health and are incorporating these objectives in the daily operation of their workplaces.
There were 11 new approvals in FY 1987.
In addition, two sites which were participants in the Try and Demonstration Programs were approved to Star.
Participants in the programs continue to avoid approximately 75 percent of the lost workday cases they would have had if they were average for their industries.
The VPP's were formally revised with a notice published in the Federal Register on March 10, 1987.
This revision was the result of a successful Demonstration Program at the Stanton Energy Center in Orlando, Florida.
This project demonstrated that alternatives to the previous requirements for representation of employees and subcontractor control resulted in a successful safety and health program.
As a result, the requirements for participation in the Try and Star Programs were revised to allow these alternatives.
OSHA continues to promote the VPP.
A major presentation was made by OSHA staff at the World Safety Organization Accident Prevention Congress.
A promotional campaign is being professionally developed to assist in securing top managements'interest in participation.
The participants in the VPP have formed an association to provide for safety and health information exchange and to promote the concept of the VPP.
Their third annual conference was held in the Chicago area in September.
Representatives of companies interested in applying to the VPP attended the conference to hear the benefits of the VPP from companies already participating.
On July 7, 1987, Assistant Secretary Pendergrass and Secretary Brock honored Mobil Chemical Company as the first company to have all of its sites within OSHA's jurisdiction approved into the VPP.
This is a significant accomplishment that required a high level of commitment from the management and employees at all of these sites.
One of the members of VPP chaired a task force representing approximately 90 percent of the poultry processing industry.
This task force analyzed the industry's ergonomic problems of repetitive motion disorders and developed a publication and a program to help resolve this problem.
On September 2, 1987, the poultry industry presented this program to Assistant Secretary Pendergrass, who recognized the significant effort that had gone into their development.
The FY 1987 enrollment at the OSHA Training Institute for compliance officers, State consultants, safety and health representatives from other Federal agencies, and the private sector was 7,612.
The safety and health training offered at the Institute is an integral element of OSHA's efforts to assist employers and employees in eliminating occupational safety and health hazards.
The Institute expanded its offering to 66 courses, 16 of which were conducted at sites away from the Institute where actual worksite situations could be experienced.
The Office of Training and Education developed and presented training to support OSHA's Special Emphasis Programs: the Training Operations Program for Compliance Officers; four training sessions to assist OSHA in assuming enforcement responsibilities in California; Recognition, Evaluation and Control of Asbestos Course; the Basic Investigation Training Course; and the Policies and Procedures for Voluntary Protection Programs Course.
This year, OSHA was involved in three seminars.
Project Minerva, presented by OSHA's Office of Training and Education in conjunction with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and the University of South Carolina, was designed to introduce safety and health issues to managers whose duties do not normally include occupational safety and health functions.
A seminar for consulting, corporate, and primary care physicians was conducted by the Office of Training and Education and co-sponsored by NIOSH and the Medical College of Wisconsin, Department of Preventive Medicine; it was designed to assist physicians in the evaluation and diagnosis of occupational illnesses.
The third, Chicagoland Safety Day Seminar, was held at the OSHA Training Institute and featured an overview of new developments in OSHA.
The New Directions grant program is designed to provide the funds an organization needs to develop its staff, skills, and services to become a competent, self-sufficient center for job safety and health.
Grantees generally participate in the program for up to five years, with some grantees also being funded for a one-year planning phase in which the program is planned and organized.
Under the New Directions grant program, in FY 1987 OSHA awarded $3.6 million to 37 nonprofit groups providing a variety of occupational safety and health services.
The grants support training and education projects addressing serious problems in high hazard occupational and industrial sectors.
Five New Directions grantees completed their programs this fiscal year and became competent, self-sufficient centers for job safety and health.
Employment Standards Administration (ESA) agencies kept up their volume of enforcement activities, initiated or revised regulations to stay abreast of changing labor problems, collected record amounts for violations, and found new initiatives for efficient management during the 1987 fiscal year.
The Wage-Hour Division, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), and the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) each accomplished their planned goals for the year.
Wage and Hour completed two major regulatory initiatives which should have significant effect on enforcement of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA): The Department published final regulations to implement the 1985 amendments to the FLSA on January 16, 1987, and final revised recordkeeping regulations were promulgated for employers subject to the FLSA, including special rules that apply to employers whose employees fall within various minimum wage and/or overtime pay exemptions in the Act.
The Office of Workers' Compensation Programs provided income protection and medical benefits of some $1.9 billion in FY 87 to nearly 400,000 beneficiaries, increasing timeliness and processing while maintaining efficiency, quality service and fiscal integrity.
The automated Special Fund System of Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Program became operational in the first quarter, providing multiple functions to expedite payments to claimants.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation increased its timeliness of initial claims adjudication with 95 percent of all claims receiving a first decision within 180 days of receipt of claim.
Some 670,000 medical bills were processed.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs accomplished 5,169 compliance reviews in FY 87, continuing a record number of conciliation agreements and enforcement actions.
Training programs on methodology were conducted in the regions as well as the national office to establish consistency in the conduct of reviews and procedures.
In September 1987, wage-hour compliance specialists and equal opportunity specialists were provided additional training to assist the Immigration and Naturalization Service with document verification and I-9 forms implementing the Immigration Reform and Control Act.
On January 16, 1987, the Department published final regulations to implement the 1985 amendments to the FLSA, which included special provisions of the Act regarding compensatory time, multiple job situations, and volunteer services, applicable to State and local government agencies and their employees.
On July 1, 1987, the Department published final revised recordkeeping regulations for employers subject to the FLSA, including special recordkeeping rules that apply to employers whose employees fall within various minimum wage and/or overtime pay exemptions in the Act.
The Wage and Hour Division is continuing to study the need for changes in the regulations regarding the minimum wage and overtime pay exemption for executive, administrative, professional, and outside sales employees (29 CFR 541).
Section 11(d) of the FLSA authorizes the Secretary of Labor to issue rules which regulate, restrict, or prohibit industrial homework in order to safeguard the Act's minimum wage requirements.
The regulations, 29 CFR 530, currently restrict industrial homework in six industries (gloves and mittens, women's apparel, embroideries, buttons and buckles, jewelry, and handkerchiefs) to individuals who are handicapped and cannot adjust to factory work or who are required to remain at home to care for an invalid.
These rules have remained in effect without significant change since the 1940s.
Following a series of regulatory and court actions commencing in 1981, the Department published a final rule in November 1984, lifting the homework restrictions for employers in the knitted outerwear industry who obtain certificates from the Department of Labor authorizing such employment.
In fiscal 1987, 10 certificates were issued to employers in the knitted outerwear industry.
After carefully reviewing FLSA enforcement in the knitted outerwear industry under the certification process, the Department published proposed rules on August 21, 1986, which would lift the restrictions in the six remaining industries.
During the period for public comment on the proposal, which ended on December 4, 1986, more than 19,000 comments were received.
The comments have been reviewed and analyzed and various options are being considered prior to further rulemaking.
Timely response to complaints was the cornerstone of the Wage and Hour Division's enforcement strategy during fiscal 1987.
The Division conducted 72,028 compliance actions under the FLSA, of which 55,203 were initiated as a result of complaints from workers or concerned citizens.
The inventory of complaints decreased from 23,921 to 22,320.
Included in the total of compliance actions were 20,368 investigations conducted under the Special Targeted Enforcement Program (STEP).
The FLSA enforcement program disclosed $28.4 million due 155,000 workers as a result of minimum wage violations, and $98 million due 329,000 employees as a result of overtime violations.
Employers agreed to pay $20.2 million in unpaid minimum wages to 136,000 workers and $79.5 million to 293,000 employees due overtime pay for a total of $99.7 million.
The difference between the amount of back wages found due employees and the amount that employers agreed to pay reflects, for the most part, sums involved in pending litigation or the failure of certain employers to pay back wages in cases the Department deemed unsuitable for litigation.
The FLSA also permits individuals to bring private suits to collect back wages, liquidated damages, attorney's fees, and court costs.
The Department's enforcement statistics do not include the back wage amounts recovered in such private suits.
In a landmark case, some 28,000 former service station employees of Hudson Oil and Affiliated Companies will receive up to $6.8 million in settlement of a lawsuit brought by the Department.
This represents the largest FLSA minimum wage and overtime pay recovery ever obtained from a private employer by the Department.
The Wage and Hour Division found 19,077 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA during fiscal 1987.
The Division assessed $1.5 million in child labor civil money penalties against 811 employers who were found to be illegally employing 10,160 minors.
A notice was published in the Federal Register on July 21, 1987, establishing the Child Labor Advisory Committee.
The committee will consist of 21 members representing employers, education, labor, child guidance professionals, civic organizations, child advocacy groups, State officials and safety officials.
The committee will, among other things, assist the Department in a comprehensive review of existing child labor regulations issued under the FLSA.
These regulations have remained essentially unchanged over the past 50 years during which time there have been significant social and technological changes in the workplace.
During fiscal 1987, the Division issued 26,597 certificates under section 14 of the FLSA, authorizing the employment of approximately 398,500 workers at less than the minimum wage.
Fulltime students and disabled workers employed by sheltered workshops accounted for 27 percent and 69 percent, respectively, of the workers employed under certificates.
On October 16, 1986, the President signed legislation which amended section 14(c) of the FLSA, pertaining to the Secretary's authority to issue certificates allowing employers to pay subminimum wages to disabled workers.
These amendments had the effect of streamlining the certification process and eliminating guaranteed wage rates specified by certificates, and requiring only commensurate wages.
In addition, the amendments established a petition procedure for review of a disabled worker's wage rate by an administrative law judge.
Proposed Regulations, Part 525, implementing the amendments to section 14(c) will be published in the Federal Register in fiscal 1988.
Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act During fiscal 1987, there were 9,225 registrants (including 7,830 farm labor contractors and 1,395 farm labor contractor employees) who employed approximately 310,000 crew members.
Wage and Hour Division conducted 4,880 Migrant and Seasonal Agriculture Worker Protection Act (MSPA) compliance actions during fiscal 1987, which resulted in civil money penalties totaling $873,430 assessed against violators.
During fiscal 1987, 113 actions were initiated to deny farm labor contractors and farm labor contractor employees certificates of registration.
The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA) amended MSPA by deleting section 106 of MSPA, which prohibited the employment of illegal aliens by farm labor contractors.
Pursuant to IRCA, illegal alien employment is now within the purview of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) and is a violation of its provisions.
Sanctions are imposed by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS).
A number of investigations which evidenced possible criminal violations of statutes other than MSPA were referred to the Justice Department in fiscal 1987.
The National Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committee and regional coordination committees, comprised of representatives of the regional and national offices of the Employment Standards Administration, Employment and Training Administration, and Occupational Safety and Health Administration, continued to coordinate programs and services for migrant and seasonal agricultural workers.
The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), as amended by IRCA, requires employers to hire only legally authorized workers, to verify new employees as being legally authorized to work, and to retain records of this verification process.
IRCA also mandates the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) to assist the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) in determining compliance with these provisions.
As of September 1, 1987, ESA began inspecting employment eligibility verification documents (INS Form I-9) for individuals hired after November 6, 1986, during the course of regularlyscheduled on-site compliance activities.
All inspection activity and findings by ESA are reported to INS.
Based on preliminary data for the first month of activity (more than 2,500 I-9 inspections nationwide), many employers inspected are not in compliance with all the IRCA requirements.
The number of employers apparently not in compliance undoubtedly reflects the newness of the program.
Further, these results do not reflect a determination by INS of compliance or non-compliance.
IRCA also significantly revised the H-2 temporary nonimmigrant agricultural worker program, administered by ETA's U.S. Employment Service (USES), with a new H-2A program.
While the administration of the H-2A program remains the reponsibility of USES/ETA, the Wage and Hour Division has been delegated responsibility for the enforcement of the contractual obligations of an employer of H-2A workers to such workers and other workers engaged in corresponding employment.
Wage-Hour enforcement functions began with applications for certification filed with the Department on and after June 1, 1987.
Government contract enforcement concentrated on complaints alleging violations of the various laws that provide labor standards for employees performing government contract work.
During fiscal 1987, 4,749 investigations were conducted under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the Service Contract Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Back wages found due 50,100 workers under the provisions of these laws totaled $35.7 million.
Employers agreed to pay $28 million of these back wage amounts to 44,300 workers.
Additional monies were to be restored upon completion of administrative hearings or litigation action.
Under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, 13,236 prevailing wage determinations were issued during the fiscal year.
Of this total, 597 were general determinations which apply to many construction contracts in a given geographic area, and 12,639 were issued for specific construction projects.
Further improvements have been made in the process of collecting wage data for use in making Davis-Bacon wage determinations.
One such improvement involves the development and delivery of a new Davis-Bacon training curriculum for regional office personnel.
Also, work was initiated to design and develop a standard automated system for Davis-Bacon survey management and processing.
Various alternatives for further improvements to this process, including automation, continue to be explored.
These improvements are expected to be completed in the spring of 1988.
General wage determinations are issued under the Davis-Bacon Act for geographic areas with a significant amount of Federal or federally-assisted construction.
The publication of these general wage determinations has been shifted from the Federal Register to a Government Printing Office (GPO) publication titled General Wage Determinations Issued under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts.
This publication is available on a subscription basis with weekly updates.
The Wage and Hour Division issued 3,443 new or revised determinations of prevailing wages and fringe benefits under the Service Contract Act (SCA) for a wide variety of job classifications.
Wage determinations were issued for application to approximately 42,300 contracts.
Progress was made in gaining experience in the issuance and use of ‘blanket'SCA wage determinations.
During the year, more than 100 such wage determinations were issued, significantly improving productivity with regard to SCAaffected procurements for the Air Force, Army, and Navy installations participating in the blanket pilot test.
During fiscal 1988, efforts will be made to expand the application of blanket procedures.
One regulatory reform issue remaining to be resolved is the Department's proposed rules to allow an expanded use of semi-skilled helpers on Davis-Bacon projects.
Initiated in 1982, these provisions were challenged in court and deferred.
On appeal, the courts upheld the Department's authority to expand the use of helpers, provided certain modifications were made in the regulations.
A new regulatory proposal, revised to comport with the court rulings, was published for public comment in the August 19, 1987, Federal Register.
As an outgrowth of the 1986 House debate on Davis-Bacon reform, the House Subcommittee on Labor Standards of the Committee on Education and Labor reported out a bill that would raise the current $2,000 threshold for coverage to $50,000 for new construction and $15,000 for repair and renovation projects, and substantially revise the Act's wage determination and enforcement procedures, The amendments cleared the full committee on July 28.
Alternative bills, sponsored by the Administration, were also introduced to raise the thresholds of both the Davis-Bacon and Service Contract Acts to $1 million for contracts awarded by the Defense Department and $100,000 for other Federal agencies, and to ease the paperwork burden for construction contractors covered by the Copeland Act.
Additional bills to raise the thresholds introduced during the Senate's consideration of the fiscal 1988 Defense Authorization Act were defeated.
OFCCP continued to foster affirmative action and the elimination of discrimination from the workplace of Federal contractors, and to obtain redress for victims of discrimination.
During FY 1987, OPCCP completed 5,169, compliance reviews.
The reviewed contractors employed a total of 3,045,521 employees.
In addition, OFCCP continued to give priority to reducing the number of aged compliance reviews over one year old.
At the end of FY 1987, there were 59 such reviews.
Complaint cases in inventory at the end of the fiscal year declined from 3,208 in FY 1980 to a current inventory level of 503 in FY 1987.
Where contractor noncompliance was found, OFCCP entered into 1,405 conciliation agreements and 1,902 letters of commitment.
OFCCP also recommended 18 enforcement actions which could result in removal of contractors from eligibility to compete for Federal contracts.
Additionally, the Solicitor of Labor filed formal administrative complaints against 11 Federal contractors and two contractors were debarred.
In FY 1987, OFCCP negotiated a total of 714 agreements in which contractors committed $19,334,171 in financial outlays for lump sum or other cash payments, front pay, back pay, salary adjustments, accommodations, recruitment and training costs, etc.
Of this total, $5,479,479 in back pay awards went to 1,171 women, minorities, disabled persons and veterans.
Since 1982, OFCCP has taken positive steps toward effecting voluntary affirmative action among the contractor community.
As a result, in FY 1987, 10,210 contractors were provided with 55,589 hours of voluntary technical assistance to better enable them to comply with OFCCP regulations.
In addition, 19 liaison groups were formed in FY 1987.
These groups continue to explore general compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
They contribute valuable input to OFCCP on ways to improve the compliance process and address aspects of affirmative action unique to their employment situations or industries.
OFCCP, in turn, provides advice, specific technical assistance and an exchange of information.
In 1,810 instances, OFCCP arranged ‘linkage"agreements between employers and agencies providing worker training or referral services.
On September 1, OFCCP assumed additional responsibilities under the Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) of 1986.
IRCA amends the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) to require all employers to hire only legally authorized workers, to verify new employees as being legally authorized to work, and to retain records of this Verification process.
OFCCP's role under IRCA involves adding a review of employers'employment eligibility verification recordkeeping compliance to regularly scheduled compliance actions.
The process involves coordinating with INS on investigation activity, requesting verification records (INS Form I-9), inspecting these records to ensure that they exist and are properly maintained and completed, '"closing out'with the employers and reporting to INS on the inspection activity and findings.
In addition, OFCCP will assist INS in their efforts to inform and educate employers and other interested groups of their responsibilities under the relevant provisions of IRCA.
During FY 1987, OFCCP gave further prority to the maintenance of quality and timeliness in its compliance actions.
A number of initiatives were in effect or were initiated to increase program outputs and improve quality and program effectiveness.
Decentralization to the regions of the Complaint Administration System (CAS).
Data entry and reporting (administrative and query) by the regional offices will improve OFCCP's ability to track and and monitor the processing of allegations of discrimination and produce more timely management, operational and courtordered reports.
Institute tight controls and monitoring of cases in progress (case management) to assure timely completion of compliance reviews and complaint investigations.
Such case management has contributed to the reduction in the number of hours required to conduct compliance reviews and complaint investigations.
Attention is also focused on case quality assurance, i.e., comprehensive and thorough investigation content and consistent application of regulations and procedures.
Continued encouragement of contractor's voluntary directed efforts toward affirmative action through increased high quality technical assistance, recognizing those contractors whose compliance efforts are meritorious, and the formulation of liaison groups with OFCCP.
Continued implementation of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with other DOL agencies to eliminate duplication of compliance efforts.
Delegation of authority to the field to take certain actions with regard to conciliation agreements without national office review and to forward certain enforcement recommendations directly to Regional Solicitors of Labor.
Implementation of the Administration's Productivity Plan (Executive Order 12552) to achieve productivity increases through FY 1992.
Further delegation of appropriate enforcement authority to both the regional and area office levels.
Streamlining the enforcement process through elimination of unnecessary and burdensome procedural steps.
Encouraging Federal Government contractors to address the need to increase availability of minorities, and women through training in order to meet employment needs of new technologies as we approach the year 2000.
Development and implementation of additional guidance on proving and remedying systemic discrimination.
Revision of the Contract Compliance Manual to coincide with agency policy and to provide better guidance to compliance officers.
Training management and field enforcement staff in implementing the revised regulations and policy/program directives.
Refined and improved management information systems designed to improve the quality, integrity and timeliness of data used in evaluating contractor performance, as well as the agency's own operational performance.
Develop a revised and comprehensive training program to address the needs of professional field staff for programmatic training.
In January 1987, OFCCP conducted training in Systemic Employment Discrimination Investigations.
Known as the OFCCP Academy, this was the first of a series of courses to be presented to staff through FY 1992.
From September through November 1987, initial courses for first-line supervisors were conducted.
Additionally, OFCCP plans to conduct a National Basic Training Conference for all field personnel next summer.
Training will be provided on the Standard Compliance Review Report and in other areas such as interviewing and investigative techniques.
Refocusing, over the next 2 to 3 years, program accomplishment away from completed paperwork to identifying program effectiveness in terms of resolution of employment problems and help for protected groups.
During FY 1987 the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) continued its concentrated effort to provide income protection and medical benefits of approximately $1.9 billion per year to nearly 400,000 beneficiaries.
To fulfill its responsibilities, OWCP increased the timeliness of case processing and implemented procedural changes to ensure the prompt processing of incoming and pending workloads, and to maintain a high degree of accuracy, fiscal integrity, and quality service to its beneficiaries.
Improvements to the quality of service to beneficiaries included a pilot program to increase the number of injured workers successfully rehabilitated and returned to work.
In the fiscal area, OWCP continued to emphasize administration and management of its debt portfolio through improved initial processing of identified overpayments, and aggressive collection action with a focus on overall reduction of outstanding accounts receivable.
An area receiving particular emphasis has been the continuing work to improve the automated data systems in each OWCP program.
These enhancements are contributing to improved debt management, improved claims processing, efficient and accurate processing of compensation payments and medical bills, and expanded management information capabilities.
In FY 1987 the Division of Federal Employees' Compensation (FECA) made significant gains in providing continued quality service and in improving the efficiency and timeliness of service delivery.
The program had its best year ever in the processing of initial injury claims.
The effort, initiated two years-ago, has shown dramatic results as reflected in meeting or exceeding program standards.
Ninety-two percent of traumatic injuries were decided within 45 days and 99 percent within 120 days.
The gains for nontraumatic claims were even more pronounced: 78 percent of nontraumatic cases were decided within 6 months, and nearly 95 percent within 10 months.
The currency of actions was noticeable in other areas as well.
Pending cases declined 10 percent more than planned; unattached mail counts were 38 percent less than anticipated for the year's end.
All these accomplishments have been sustained throughout the year, indicating that the program has secured performance in these areas and is ready to seek ways of further improving its benefit delivery system.
The Division instituted a letter to claimants whose cases are accepted, advising them of their accepted condition, the procedure for submitting bills and claims for wage loss, and their responsibility to seek and accept light duty.
The Division published and implemented revised Regulations for the Federal Employees'Compensation Act.
Many program changes have occurred since the last regulatory revisions in 1975.
These changes were written into the regulations during FY 1987.
The changes will improve the administration and efficiency of the program by clarifying the claims process, streamlining the hearings and review process, and better defining the responsibilities of the various parties to a claim, especially those of the employing Federal agencies.
All FECA personnel were trained in the changes occasioned by the regulations.
FECA field offices were provided informational materials, including a specially developed video tape, for distribution to and use by other Federal agencies.
In conjunction with the Office of Management and Budget's (OMB) initiative to improve agency management of their compensation programs, FECA provided OMB with an analysis of chargeback costs and trends for a five-year period for all government agencies and for selected individual agencies.
FECA also made recommendations to OMB concerning performance measures for agency programs.
In response to this initiative FECA stepped up its technical assistance and training for Federal agencies, with emphasis on methods for improving FECA program management, cost containment, prompt submissions of claims to OWCP, and provisions of the revised regulations.
The program continued to make significant improvements in managing its debt portfolio.
Additional or revised procedures in debt case processing were published.
Overpayment collections and third party recoveries increased over the previous year.
The rates of waivers and writeoffs were accelerated as well, thus contributing to a net overall decrease in the outstanding accounts receivables throughout FY 1987.
FECA also continued to enhance its automated debt management system.
These enhancements will provide automatic reporting of delinquent debtors to credit bureaus, improve the liability of management reports, and improve the efficiency and responsiveness of the entire system.
Division of Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation A number of accomplishments are noted for FY 1987 in the operations of the Longshore Program's automated systems.
The Special Fund System became operational in the first quarter of the year.
Capabilities of the system include the automatic computation of benefits payable to a claimant.
The system has the capability to record and calculate the amount of assessment due from each insurance carrier and self-insured employer.
It also produces statistical modeling reports for use in preparing actuarial assumptions to accurately project the growth and financial needs of the Longshore Special Fund.
The system also now accommodates the direct electronic transfer of benefit checks to the claimants'bank accounts.
Several improvements to the Longshore automated case management system were implemented during FY 1987.
The enhancements enable easier access to and use of the system by program staff, development of productivity and other management reports, automated use of address labels and postcards for use in correspondence, and an updated word processing capability.
Lost-time injuries reported to the Longshore program increased to 43,033, 4.4 percent over 1986.
During a typical month, approximately 19,000 maritime and other workers or their survivors covered by the Longshore and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act were receiving compensation payments.
In April 1987, the Longshore Division decentralized a portion of its authority for adjudicating the Act's Section 8(f) cases for the purpose of streamlining the processing of these cases and enhancing direct feedback to employers and insurance carriers.
Employers and insurance carriers may apply for limitation of their liability to pay compensation under the second injury relief’provisions of Section 8(f) of the Act.
Section 8(f) cases are those in which the employee has a pre-existing condition due to a previous injury which may have increased the severity of the most recent injury.
Under amended procedures, the program's assistant deputy comissioners in the district offices have been delegated authority to deny relief, without the need for referral of the application and case to the national office for concurrence.
Additional streamlining of the processing of these cases also occurred.
The Solicitor of Labor decentralized to the regional offices the responsibility for representing the OWCP Director in litigating Section 8(f) cases.
Procedures and lines of communication have been established to ensure more efficient coordination between regional offices of the Solicitor and OWCP.
During FY 1987 the Vocational Rehabilitation program successfully returned 1,101 injured workers to full-time, permanent employment.
This figure represents a 24 percent increase over the rehabilitations made in FY 1986.
Part of the reason for this increase was due to the successes of a rehabilitation pilot project conducted during the year to identify effective rehabilitation service delivery models.
The increased number of injured workers screened and referred for rehabilitation services as a result of the pilot project will produce larger numbers of rehabilitations during the coming year.
The program also completed an effort to increase the number of rehabilitation counselors available to provide services to OWCP injured workers by conducting Rehabilitation Counselor Certification workshops in all regions.
These workshops are part of the overall counselor certification program which has standardized the policies and procedures for contracting with rehabilitation counselors.
It also has contributed to increasing the number of rehabilitated workers and to improving the quality and timeliness of service.
The Division improved the timeliness of initial claims adjudication.
Approximately 96 percent of all claims received a first decision within 180 days of receiving the Black Lung program claim.
In claims maintenance, the annual beneficiary status update process was made more efficient.
The update form was previously mailed out manually in blank form; the process is now automated.
The form is preprinted with the beneficiary's most recent information and the beneficiary needs only to confirm its accuracy or indicate changes.
The program continued to place emphasis on reducing the number of outstanding accounts receivable.
Collections of overpayments, recoveries from coal operators and medical providers, and other settlements for FY 1987 showed significant improvement over FY 1986.
The program also prepared updated procedures for debt case processing and management of its accounts receivable, and conducted training in these procedures and in the use of related features of the automated accounting system.
Approximately 670,000 medical bills were processed during FY 1987.
This number reflects a continuing trend toward increased receipts by the program due in significant part to the cost shifting initiatives being pursued by other medical providers, especially Medicare and Medicaid.
These medical providers are more carefully screening the cases which may be paid under the Black Lung program.
Throughout FY 1987 a number of enhancements were made to the Black Lung program's Automated Support Package (ASP).
Manual management information reports on claims adjudication and claims maintenance activities were automated.
The accounting system now automatically calculates interest on open accounts receivable.
The insurance status and history of past insurance coverage of more than 2,600 major coal mine operators have been input into the ASP to assist in the prompt identification of the private party responsible for payment of claims.
Data is also contained on 275 firms that provide insurance coverage and claims management services to coal mine operators to secure their liabilities under the Black Lung Benefits Act.
An additional enhancement to the automated system involves reporting to the Internal Revenue Service.
Automated preparation of Form 1099 for reporting to the IRS the payments made to medical providers has been in place for several years.
IRS payments made to attorneys for legal assistance to Black Lung claimants in establishing their entitlements.
Nearly $3 million in such legal fees were reported to the IRS for tax year 1986.
Other enhancements to the ASP include incorporation of more detailed information on the history of disability and medical payments made to beneficiaries and more detailed information on case adjudication activity at the hearings and appeals levels.
Modifications were made to improve system security while simplifying usage, and communication to program staff using the system has been eased through development of a user message screen.
A temporary 10 percent increase in the excise tax on coal was included in the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985.
This measure became effective on April 1, 1986.
The excise tax increase yielded revenues sufficient to cover approximately 95 percent of benefit expenditures in FY 1987.
The Office of State Liaison Legislative Analysis continued to provide assistance to the States and to coordinate Federal-State activities in the areas of workers'compensation, labor standards, and equal employment opportunity.
The Division of Legislative Analysis prepared background materials and coordinated the preparation and clearance of Congressional testimony on: (1) proposed changes to the Davis-Bacon and Service Contract Acts and (2) the operation of the affirmative action for Federal contractors and the Federal Employees'Compensation Act programs.
The Division analyzed and kept track of more than 100 Congressional bills of interest to ESA.
DLA prepared reports on bills on minimum wages, product liability and tort reform, mandated parental and medical leave, employer's use of polygraph tests, notification to workers with high risk of contracting occupational diseases, and equal employment opportunity.
The Division coordinated preparation of ESA's portion of the Department's Annual Legislative Program, which was submitted to the Office of Management and Budget.
The Division also coordinated the preparation of ESA's submissions to the annual Regulatory Program of the U.S. Government and the semiannual Unified Agenda of Federal Regulations.
The Division of State Employment Standards Programs continued to provide expertise on State labor standards laws and programs that interact with ESA programs or relate to emerging issues.
Most prominent was State activity in increasing minimum wage rates in several States to levels above the Federal rate of $3.35 an hour, and, in others, to match the Federal rate.
Updated rate information was maintained constantly and disseminated frequently for the consideration of State legislatures and labor departments in their decision-making.
With regard to emerging issues, States served in the legislative forefront in addressing such subjects as parental leave, drug testing, plant closing and unjust discharge.
The Division served as catalyst and facilitator in the consideration of proposed ESA/State cooperative agreements designed to improve Federal/State coordination in the administration of similar programs.
The Division provided techmical advisory assistance and information on numerous labor standards subjects in response to some 1,900 requests from State labor departments and legislatures, management organizations, multi-State employers, organized labor, other Federal agencies, the Congress, and others.
Throughout the year, the Division maintained active working relationships with State governmental labor officials and their organizations, and participated in several regional and national conferences of State officials.
In serving as a national clearinghouse of information on State legislative developments, the Division reviewed and analyzed about 1,200 labor bills and new laws and prepared an annual article on State trends for publication.
The Division of State Workers'Compensation Programs analyzed 204 enacted workers'compensation amendments from over 1,000 proposed amendments during fiscal 1987.
This information was used to prepare periodic reports on significant legislation enacted by the States and to produce or update 11 informational charts and tables.
The Division produced its semiannual publication, State Workers'Compensation Laws and worked closely with the International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commissions in updating its in-depth profile on the administration of each State workers'compensation agency for inclusion in the publication, State Workers' Compensation Administration Profiles.
In response to requests, the Division of State Workers' Compensation Programs provided technical assistance and information to State workers' compensation agencies, legislative committees and commissions, and other entities and individuals interested in workers'compensation.
Fiscal Year 1987 saw a significant decrease in the number of deaths in the coal mining industry compared with the previous fiscal year.
A record-low 60 coal mining fatalities occurred during FY 1987, a decrease from 89 during the previous fiscal year.
The metal and nonmetal mining industry recorded 64 fatalities in the 1987 fiscal year compared to 50 during FY 1986.
In response to issues raised during congressional hearings on agency matters, the Mine Safety and Health Administration began a reevaluation of certain policies and practices to increase efficiency and effectiveness in ensuring the safety and health of the nation's miners.
One area of improvement undertaken by MSHA focused on improving management accountability.
A three-tiered approach, including audits of MSHA districts or field offices by headquarters personnnel, self-evaluation by the district office staffs, and evaluation of individual inspectors by supervisors, was developed to assure quality and uniformity of mine inspections throughout the country.
Another area concerned the effectiveness of MSHA's investigations of mine accidents in which there were multiple fatalities.
The agency decided to make MSHA personnel from outside of a certain MSHA district office responsible for investigation of any multiple-fatality accident within that district, rather than having staff from that district be in charge of the investigation.
Another change, aimed at improving the process, also restricts any MSHA employees from investigating an accident at a mine that they were responsible for inspecting.
In another activity area, an internal study group recommended tighter procedures under which mining companies report accidents and injuries to MSHA and for keeping the required records on such incidents.
These and other adminstrative and procedural changes were being made by the end of the fiscal year.
Two years of research, planning and discussion culminated in the national kickoff conference of the Mining Industry Committee on Substance Abuse, composed of industry, government, labor and academic representatives.
With strong support from MSHA, committee members developed a variety of programs and informational products which are being made available to the mining community to help reduce alcohol and drug abuse in the workplace.
One such product is a 33-minute videotape depicting typical problem situations at mines in which alcohol and drugs may be involved.
MSHA put into effect an education and training program to improve the quality of training provided for coal miners.
Each MSHA coal mine safety and health district office established guidelines to improve its accident prevention program, evaluate the quality of the training, and assure that the training was received.
About 100 new coal mine inspectors and engineers were hired and received 12 weeks of intensive training during fiscal 1987.
The agency also offered technical training for mine inspectors designed to keep their skills current with developing technology.
A final report detailing the causes of the Wilberg Mine fire in Utah that killed 27 miners in 1984 was issued in August 1987.
Corrective measures initiated by the agency after the fire to reduce the possibility of a similar occurrence in the future continued to be emphasized during fiscal year 1987.
Mercury exposure continued to be of concern in metal and nonmetal mining.
Mercury contamination is a byproduct of gold and silver mining.
MSHA's technical committee concluded that the hazard is controllable at newer mine properties and compliance with safety requirements is possible, but that many older mine properties with relatively extensive mercury contamination could not be brought into compliance.
MSHA's mine emergency equipment was deployed once in a non-mine emergency rescue attempt in FY 1987 when a large building under construction in Bridgeport, CT, collapsed causing heavy loss of life.
MSHA assessed civil penalties for 131,454 violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act and of mandatory safety and health standards.
This represented an increase of slightly more than one percent over the previous fiscal year.
During fiscal year 1987, there were 2,208 underground coal mines and 3,019 surface mines and facilities under the jurisdiction of the Coal Mine Safety and Health (CMS&H) Division.
The coal mining division conducted 42,723 inspections and investigations and 1,274 education and training activities at surface mines and facilities.
Inspectors issued 106,360 citations and withdrawal orders to coal mine operators and independent contractors for violations of safety and health regulations.
Supervisory officials held 1,417 health and safety conferences to discuss inspectors'findings at the request of operators and labor representatives.
Coal mine inspectors, technical specialists, education and training specialists, and supervisors operated from 10 district offices, 17 subdistrict offices, and 74 field locations.
At the end of the fiscal year, the coal mine safety and health work force numbered 1,567.
There were a record low 60 fatalities at coal mining operations during fiscal year 1987, down from 89 during the same period in 1986.
The fatal incidence rate for FY 1987 was .04 deaths per 200,000 employee hours compared to .05 in FY 1986.
The incidence rate for all types of injuries in coal mining increased from 6.46 in FY 86 to 9.19 in FY 87.
Coal mining employees (excluding office workers) numbered 166,935 at the end of FY 87, as compared to 180,688 in FY 1986.
CMS&H investigated 174 complaints of safety and health related discrimination incidents that coal mine employees filed with the agency during the fiscal year.
Thirty-eight investigations into possible knowing or willful violations of regulations also were conducted.
The division continued to monitor the decline of coal miner participation in the X-ray Surveillance Program, a voluntary program in which miners are monitored for pneumoconiosis, a disease common to coal miners.
The decline carried over into the Part 90 Program, which was developed to prevent progression of lung disease by allowing affected miners to work in areas of a mine having relatively low coal dust levels.
The number of Part 90 participants fell from a peak level of 550 miners in FY 1981 to an FY 1986 level of 175 miners being sampled.
A special committee was formed to update MSHA's coal mine inspection manuals to make them more effective.
Threefourths of the work was completed during the fiscal year.
Inspector noise survey results were computerized during the year, allowing for improved analysis of noise survey completion rates, noise levels, and exposure levels within the coal mining industry.
As part of an ongoing effort to assure the integrity and control of coal mine safety and health programs, on-site evaluations of respirable dust sampling, Part 90, and noise programs were conducted in four MSHA districts.
An education and training program was implemented to improve the quality of training provided to miners.
Each district office established guidelines to improve its accident prevention program, evaluate the quality of training provided to coal miners, and assure that they receive the required training.
During fiscal year 1987, the division's internal supervisory development program was completed by 20 supervisory trainees, the second such group to complete this program consisting of more than a year of classroom and on-the-job instruction.
About 100 new coal mine inspectors and engineers were hired during FY 1987.
Each new employee received 12 weeks of formal training consisting of three-week modules followed by three-week on-the-job segments.
CMS&H continued its technical training program for mine inspectors with each inspector receiving two weeks of formal classroom training designed to keep skills current with developing technology.
The 1987 National Coal Mine Rescue and First Aid Contest was held in Louisville, KY, September 15-17, with more than 90 of the top rescue teams in the country participating.
During the rescue competition for trophies and other awards the eight-member teams enter mock-up mines and try to safely and efficiently locate victims of simulated disasters such as mine fires or explosions.
The event is conducted to ensure that mine rescue and first aid teams are well trained for possible use in emergencies.
A preliminary report on the Wilberg Mine fire that killed 27 miners in December 1984 was issued in March 1987, and congressional hearings on the tragedy were conducted in April and June 1987.
A final report detailing the causes of the fire was issued in August 1987.
Corrective enforcement measures initiated by MSHA after the fire to reduce the possibility that similar accidents could occur continued to be emphasized during fiscal year 1987.
MSHA's Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health Division was responsible for promoting safety and health at some 435 underground mines and 10,978 surface mines, quarries, sand and gravel operations, and mineral mills during fiscal year 1987.
These operations produce a wide range of mineral materials such as gold, lead, zinc, copper, iron, uranium, potash, and limestone among many others.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors and specialists operate from six district offices, 10 subdistrict offices, and 53 field offices throughout the nation.
This activity's workforce numbered 534 employees.
During the fiscal year, 17,881 complete regular inspections were made at metal and nonmetal mines and mills.
Another 1,054 regular inspections were made at mines that were not actively producing: for example, operations with crews performing only maintenance work.
Enforcement personnel also made 208 inspections or investigations in fiscal 1987 in response to hazard complaints.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors issued 34,794 compliance orders and citations for violations of safety or health regulations.
Inspectors also made 6,162 compliance followup inspections to check for correction of previously identified violations.
A total of 743 other inspections were made at gassy mines, electrical installations, mines using hoist equipment, and mines engaged in shaft sinking.
At the request of management or labor, 286 health and safety post-inspection conferences were held with supervisory personnel to discuss inspectors' findings.
According to preliminary data, 64 fatalities occurred in metal and nonmetal mining during FY 1987.
This compares to 50 deaths in fiscal year 1986, the lowest figure ever recorded for a fiscal year.
Between October and June of FY 1987, there were 47 fatalities and 6,839 total injuries compared to 40 fatalities and 6,181 total injuries during the same period in fiscal year 1986.
This represents an 18 percent increase in the number of fatalities and an eleven percent increase in the total injuries.
Consequently, the fatal incidence rate was at .03 for October through June of fiscal year 1987 and for FY 1986.
The allinjury incidence rate was 4.95 for 1987 compared to 4.42 for 1986.
The average number of employees and employee hours remained about the same.
Metal and nonmetal mine training specialists conducted 444 classes, meetings and visits to mine sites during the fiscal year.
Special investigations were made in response to 40 complaints of discrimination as prescribed by section 105 (c) of the Mine Safety and Health Act and 110 possible knowing and willful violations involving corporate agents.
Two continuing special emphasis programs conducted during the fiscal year included the Progranı in Accident Reduction (PAR) and the Compliance Assistance Visits (CAVs).
The Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) included 20 mining operations having injury rates significantly higher than the national average at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Operations in the PAR program received extra attention in those areas found deficient through audits and review of the mine's safety program.
From October 1986 through June 1987, PAR operations achieved a 42 percent reduction in lost workdays and a 31 percent reduction in their injury incidence rates.
Inspectors made 1,593 compliance assistance visits (CAVs) at the request of mine operators to mines and mills that were opening for the first time, resuming operations, opening new sections, or installing new equipment.
Since these sites are not yet in operation, citations are not issued on these visits.
On the next regular inspection, inspectors check to make sure that any conditions noted on the CAV have been corrected.
During the fiscal year, inspectors wrote 10,913 notices at CAV visits.
Mercury exposure continues to be of concern in gold and silver mining.
It has been concluded by MSHA's technical committee, which has been evaluating controls for mercury, that this hazard is controllable at newer properties and, thus, compliance can be achieved.
However, older, more heavily mercury-contaminated properties cannot achieve compliance.
Along with the Nevada Mining Association and the Nevada Division of Mining, MSHA sponsored a two-day conference entitled Mercury in Mining.
More than 100 attendees listened to speakers from the mining industry, the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the State of Nevada, and MSHA discuss exposure limits and monitoring, medical surveillance, control technology, environmental surveillance and personal protective equipment.
MSHA planned to publish the proceedings of the conference as well as an informational pamphlet regarding mercury workplace guidelines.
Also, as part of the metal and nonmetal internal control program, evaluations were conducted of mine safety enforcement practices in the South Central and North Central Districts.
The Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances (OSRV) continued the extensive review of major groups of mine safety and health regulations.
These reviews updated and clarified MSHA's regulations and eliminated unnecessary provisions while continuing to provide maximum protection to the safety and health of miners.
The goals were consistent with statutory provisions of the 1977 Mine Act, the Regulatory Flexibility Act, and two Executive orders.
To achieve its goals, OSRV worked to identify any redundant or unnecessary standards.
The agency sought to provide compliance alternatives and to establish provisions that will accommodate advances in technology.
Other goals included elimination of inconsistencies, reduction of needless paperwork burdens on the industry, and promotion of more effective recordkeeping and reporting by mine operators where possible.
On October 8, 1986, MSHA published a final rule updating standards for ground control at metal and nonmetal mines.
The rule became effective on December 8, 1986.
On July 1, 1987, MSHA published a final rule revising its standards for methane in metal and nonmetal mines with an effective date of October 29, 1987.
The office continued to review existing metal and nonmetal mining regulations, including air quality, explosives and electrical standards.
Final rules for loading, hauling and dumping, and machinery and equipment were near publication at the close of the fiscal year.
On December 19, 1986, MSHA published a proposed rule and a request for public comment on its radiation standards in underground metal and nonmetal mines.
Public hearings were held in August 1987.
In May, MSHA published a final rule updating fees for testing, evaluation and approval of mining products.
The rule became effective on October 1, 1987.
A major review of underground coal mine safety standards also continued in fiscal 1987.
A proposed rule covering explosives and blasting was published in May 1986 and hearings were held to discuss the proposal in November 1986 and again in April 1987.
A final rule on explosives was being prepared at the end of FY 1987.
Also in November 1986, MSHA published an additional proposed rule on requirements for approval of explosives and sheathed explosive units.
Public hearings were held to discuss this proposal in April 1987, and work continued on the final rule.
The agency published an emergency temporary standard (ETS) in June regarding use of self-contained self-rescue devices.
This ETS required "hands on'training in the use of SCSR's for all persons entering underground coal mines after September 28, 1987.
A proposed rule and a request for public comment was published simultaneously.
The standards office continued to review public comments on MSHA's proposed procedures that would apply to testing of certain underground mining equipment by an industry applicant or a third party.
This procedure would make MSHA responsible for post approval oversight of product quality and safety rather than product testing.
As proposed, MSHA would still retain all final approval authority.
Companion rules on approval of brattice cloth, ventilation tubing, and battery assemblies were also pending completion.
The agency was studying a petition filed jointly by the American Mining Congress and the Bituminous Coal Operator's Association to institute a rulemaking proceeding to revise the accident reporting and recordkeeping system of MSHA and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
MSHA began procedures to establish a statutory advisory committee on the approval and use of diesel-powered equipment in underground coal mines.
The committee was expected to convene in the fall of 1987 and continue its work during the 1988 fiscal year.
Other regulatory topics under review during the fiscal year included proposed rules addressing automatic warning devices for mobile equipment at surface coal mines, brakes for underground mobile coal mining equipment, electrical systems in underground coal mines, electric mine lamps, pattern of violations, mine plan approvals and certification/qualification of persons.
Technical Support personnel responded to six mine emergencies including four mine fires, one fire seal relocation, and one mine explosion in fiscal year 1987.
MSHA's mine emergency equipment was deployed and used in search and rescue operations when a large building under construction in Bridgeport, CT, collapsed causing heavy loss of life.
Extensive work was conducted on electrical components recovered from the 1984 Wilberg Mine fire in Utah for the purpose of either confirming or denying possible scenarios put forth to explain aspects of the accident.
Much work was done to evaluate conditions of the various components as they existed just before the fire started.
The work was coordinated with representatives of the United Mine Workers of America and the Emery Mining Co.
Additionally, extensive tests were conducted in the Bureau of Mines experimental mine at Bruceton, PA, to determine whether a low level electrical fault current from a power cable suspended from a mine roof bolt could have caused the Wilberg Mine fire.
The experiment indicated that this scenario was not a cause of the mine fire.
Technical Support personnel made 506 in-mine or field studies during the fiscal year.
Investigators made evaluations of potentially hazardous equipment, mine dusts, excessive noise, poisonous gases, electrical hazards, explosives and hoisting problems, among others.
Recommendations for alleviating these conditions were made as warranted.
About 87,000 respirable dust samples from coal mine operators were processed in accordance with applicable regulations.
Also, data from approximately 5,000 samples submitted by inspectors for analysis were weighed and 2,000 production samples of newly manufactured dust cassettes were checked.
To insure the quality of noise exposure measurements, technicians evaluated, calibrated, and repaired more than 6,000 instruments during fiscal 1987.
Technical Support specialists also compiled a computer data base of the results of acoustical industrial hygiene surveys, making them readily available to researchers.
A total of 144 engineering design plans for coal mine waste impoundments were reviewed during the year, and recommendations concerning the plans were forwarded to appropriate MSHA offices.
MSHA's Approval and Certification Center completed approximately 4,300 approval actions on application requests primarily from manufacturers of mining products.
Approval programs were streamlined during the year, reducing turnaround time and the average number of hours necessary to complete the approval process, resulting in the elimination of the backlogs of approval actions.
About 131,000 employment, accident, and injury report forms were received, analyzed, coded, and entered into the computerized data base during the year.
Almost 8,000 more injuries were reported during FY 1987 than during the previous fiscal year.
During fiscal year 1987, the Office of Assessments assessed civil penalties for 131,454 violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act and of mandatory safety and health standards.
This represented an increase of just over one percent more than FY 1986.
The amount collected decreased from $10.1 million in fiscal 1986 to $9.9 million in fiscal year 1987.
Penalties were increased for violations issued for failing to report mining injuries and accidents.
The $20 single penalty for certain categories of violations was waived and higher special assessments issued in those instances where the mine operator did not have any excuse for not reporting an injury.
Assessments for all violations continued to be issued in a timely and accurate manner.
Mine operators requested a hearing with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on 3,334 of the total number of violations assessed, a figure comparable to that for the 1986 fiscal year.
During fiscal year 1987, Educational Policy and Development (EPD) conducted evaluations in six districts to assess the need for development, revision or elimination of training policies.
The administrative training manual, CFR Parts 75 and 77, was revised during the year to provide MSHA and industry personnel with an up-to-date, definitive reference guide to all MSHA regulations pertinent to training.
Educational Policy and Development developed and distributed an abandoned mines information booklet containing information on the hazards associated with abandoned mines.
Problems and accident trends associated with small underground coal and metal and nonmetal mines were addressed by another booklet that was developed and distributed.
The office also developed a personal computer program that enables mining companies to produce an MSHA-approved alternate training form for recording required training and managing training records and data.
During fiscal year 1987, 46 states participated in MSHA's State Grants program which funds state mine safety activities including miner training.
More than $5 million was granted to state programs during the fiscal year and 120,000 miners were trained.
Nearly 18,000 people took part in educational programs at the National Mine Health and Safety Academy in Beckley, WV, for about 41,000 student-days.Each year instructors at the academy tailor courses on a wide spectrum of mine health and safety subjects to meet the needs of specific groups of students.
Over the past fiscal year, training at the academy included hands-on work in specialized laboratories, field trips, use of an extensive library focused on mine safety and health, and opportunities for self-paced individual study.
About half of the training provided was for MSHA inspectors, with the rest designated for training of industry, labor, and state personnel.
The effects on benefit security of plan terminations involving asset reversions and other termination and funding-related issues continued to be of particular interest to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) during fiscal year 1987.
4) appropriate restrictions on certain plan investments in employer securities.
For example, under the proposal, employers would be allowed to withdraw a portion of any surplus assets from ongoing plans without requiring termination of the plan, provided a number of conditions designed to protect plan participants and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation are met.
In addition, the proposal provided for the transfer of certain surplus pension assets to underfunded pension or unfunded retiree health plans.
In summary, the proposal was designed to amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) to make the private pension system more stable, credible and secure.