An expanding job market and stable economic growth again added up to good news for American workers and their families in fiscal year 1988.
Unemployment dropped to its lowest level in 14 years.
Total employment reached a new high for the sixth consecutive year, and as the year ended a higher proportion of our labor force was working than at any time in our nation's history.
Spurred by increased exports, factory output also reached record levels, pushing manufacturing employment up by 300,000 jobs.
Blacks, Hispanics and women continued to be among the chief beneficiaries of the growth in employment that began in 1982.
By the end of the fiscal year, black employment had increased almost 30 percent since 1982 and Hispanic employment was up more than 45 percent.
Women, who make up about 45 percent of the labor force, filled 55 percent of the new jobs created since 1982, and by the end of fiscal 1988 the historic disparity between the unemployment rates of adult men and adult women had virtually disappeared.
Inflation and interest rates remained under control in 1988, contributing to continued steady growth in income and spendable earnings for American workers and their families.
Looking to the future, the Labor Department in 1988 was involved in a variety of projects designed to strengthen the ability of American workers to keep the nation prosperous and competitive in a changing and challenging global economy.
Projections of slower growth in the labor force, along with strong evidence that tomorrow's jobs will require better educated and more highly skilled workers, mean that America will have to make full use of all its human resources.
The Labor Department examined that issue from a number of angles in fiscal 1988.
A report, Building a Quality Workforce, issued jointly by the Departments of Labor, Commerce and Education, found that a basic skills gap exists among entry-level workers.
To counter the skills gap, the report called for improvements in our educational system and better communication between schools and employers.
To further explore the skills gap and related issues in the changing American workplace, Labor Secretary Ann McLaughlin appointed a non-partisan Commission on Workforce Quality and Labor Market Efficiency composed of representatives of business, labor, government, the education community and the public.
The commission, which was asked to concentrate its efforts on finding ways to build on the talents of American workers, will issue its final report in the second half of 1989.
Child care, another important workforce issue, was scrutinized in a report by a Labor Department task force, which emphasized the need for flexibility in responding to the concerns expressed by working parents.
Only a cooperative effort involving the private sector and all levels of government can provide the wide range of child care options that working parents want and need, the task force report said.
Concern over reports that aerospace and construction companies employ few women technicians and craft workers prompted Secretary McLaughlin to create a Labor Department task force to look into the situation.
The task force was instructed to determine whether there are overt or subtle pressures against hiring women in the two industries, and to recommend solutions if problems exist.
How some companies are finding innovative ways to hire and develop women, minorities and other groups of workers who often have been bypassed was the subject of a Department-funded study entitled Opportunity 2000: Creative Affirmative Action Strategies for a Changing Workforce.
The study profiled strategies firms use to moderate the conflict between work and family responsibilities and to recruit, develop and retain minority and economically disadvantaged workers, disabled workers, older workers and veterans.
A separate Department task force was set up to examine policy issues impacting older workers, who were expected to play an increasingly important role in the labor force as the median age of the nation's population rises over the next decade.
Issues on the task force's agenda included flexibility and options in pension, health and welfare benefit plans, retraining of older workers, mobility and flexible work arrangements, physical accommodations for safety and health, dependent elder care and the cap on social security income for elderly wage earners.
There was particularly encouraging news from the mining industry, which experienced a record decline in fatalities in both coal and non-coal mining and an historic low of 11 fatalities from roof collapses.
Connecticut and the Bath Iron Works in Maine.
A fine of $5.1 million was proposed against several employers as a result of the fatal construction collapse at L'Ambiance Plaza, and a $4.2 million penalty was levied against the Bath Works for alleged safety, health and recordkeeping violations.
OSHA continued to emphasize voluntary compliance as an effective way to protect workers.
Key elements of this approach included consultation visits to worksites, recognition of safe worksites through the Voluntary Protection Program, and grants to create safety and health training centers.
Among the major rulemaking activities during the year were final rules on grain handling, concrete and masonry construction, and an excursion limit for asbestos.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration adopted a new procedure for auditing accident reports by coal mine operators as part of its stepped up efforts to improve accident reporting throughout the mining indsutry.
Audits of accident reporting by non-coal mines were doubled in 1988 compared to the previous fiscal year.
Enforcement actions by the Employment Standards Administration resulted in employers agreeing to pay $108 million in back minimum wages and overtime pay to some 421,000 workers.
Almost 2,000 fewer wage and hour complaints were pending under the Fair Labor Standards Act at the end of 1988 than a year earlier.
Enforcement activities under the Davis-Bacon Act and other wage standard laws covering government contractors resulted in recovery of almost $30 million due some 46,000 workers.
The Office of Workers' Compensation Programs provided $1.8 billion in medical and rehabilitation services and wage loss benefits to almost 400,000 beneficiaries under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, Black Lung Benefits Act and Longshore and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act.
With an eye toward updating and improving administration of labor standards that have been on the books for a long time, a Child Labor Advisory Committee was established to review regulations on employment of minors.
These regulations had remained essentially unchanged for 50 years.
Continuing its efforts to eliminate employment discrimination by Federal contractors, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) conducted almost 5,500 compliance reviews and recommended 123 enforcement actions which could result in loss of Federal contract eligibility by recalcitrant firms.
Of this total, some $8.7 million was for back pay to almost 3,200 women, minorities, veterans and handicapped persons.
To bolster its ongoing efforts to promote voluntary affirmative action, OFCCP formed 24 liaison groups during the year to explore compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
A major Labor Department goal--stronger protection of private pension plan benefits--was achieved early in the fiscal year through enactment of a law amending the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
Among other provisions, the law required employers with underfunded plans to make additional pension contributions and to pay increased contributions to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
Improvement of the enforcement provisions of the fiduciary provisions of ERISA also was a major concern.
In a significant move, the Pension and Welfare Benefit Administration (PWBA) took steps to monitor how investment managers exercise their fiduciary responsiblity under ERISA regarding proxy voting of stock owned by pension plans.
In regulatory action, PWBA issued a rule designed to ensure that employees' payments to their accounts were made promptly and not used by employers for business purposes, and proposed new rules to speed processing of prohibited transactions exemptions under ERISA.
PWBA enforcement actions resulted in the recovery of more than $100 million for employee benefit plans, most of it through voluntary compliance.
Enactment of a major new program to help workers cope with economic change was one of the highlights of the year for the Employment and Training Administration (ETA).
ETA did the staff work for the Administration-supported Economic Dislocation Assistance and Worker Adjustment Program.
The new program offered a comprehensive set of services designed to help dislocated workers return to productive employment as quickly as possible.
A national conference on "Building a Quality Workforce," organized with the help of ETA, brought together leaders from the public and private sectors to discuss ways employers and educators could work together to enhance the skills of young people and prepare them for the more demanding jobs that lie ahead.
The conference was just one aspect of ETA's continuing emphasis on initiatives to help young people, especially disadvantaged youth, become responsible, self-sufficient members of society.
These efforts included funding of research projects to improve job-related literacy and continued work on Youth 2000, a nationwide program to focus public and private attention and resources on the problems of at-risk young people.
Planning got under way for a major review of how the Job Training Partnership Act--the Federal Government's primary job training program--operated during its first five years and how it could be improved.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics, in support of the Department's emphasis on preparing the nation's workforce for the future, issued projections on labor force and occupational changes to the year 2000.
The Bureau also helped illuminate another major Department concern, work-family issues, with a report on the child care policies of U.S. businesses.
More than $2.8 million was recovered as a result of prosecutions following fraud and integrity investigations carried out by the Office of Inspector General.
These investigations also resulted in almost $3.7 million in fines, penalties, restitutions and settlements and $2.6 million in cost efficiencies.
Enforcement activities of the Office of Labor-Management Standards culminated in 181 convictions or pre-trial diversion agreements, a record number for a single year under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act.
Almost $1 million in embezzled union funds was recovered and more than $101,000 in fines were imposed by the courts.
Homeless veterans in 17 cities received help through the outreach program run by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans'Employment and Training.
Outreach workers urged homeless veterans to seek--and helped them obtain--services and training that would get them off the streets and into gainful employment.
The Department's interest in strengthening the nation's workforce was reflected in DOL 2000, a new program to improve the productivity and working conditions of the Department's own employees.
Department employees at all levels; development of an Executive Computer Network as part of a long-range plan to make the most effective use of modern information technology, and establishment of a Clerical Support Program to make available a reservoir of well-trained clerical employees to draw upon when additional personnel are needed.
Improving the quality of the workforce and increasing the effectiveness of agency programs were the primary and interrelated emphases of the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) during program year 1987 and fiscal year 1988.
ETA is the agency with lead responsibility for the Federal Government's job training programs.
To help achieve these goals, and thus prepare workers for the jobs of the future, ETA did the staff work for a major legislative initiative which proposed a new comprehensive approach to the problem of dislocated workers and was introduced in the first session of the 100th Congress.
Subsequently, ETA provided policy and technical assistance to Administration officials and to members of Congress and their staffs on the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-418).
This law authorizes the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance Program, a new program for dislocated workers which contains many features of the Administration's original proposal and replaces Title III of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
ETA began planning for a major review of experience under JTPA.
Assisted by a panel of outside experts in the training and employment field, the review was to examine the first five years' experience under JTPA and identify ways the quality of services provided could be enhanced.
ETA made significant progress in reexamining the concept of apprenticeship to determine its future role in meeting America's need for a skilled work force.
These and other developments are discussed below.
Some agency activities are conducted on a program year basis, some on a fiscal year basis, and a few on a calendar year cycle.
Information is provided accordingly.
In PY 1987, ETA continued its emphasis on "Youth 2000,"a major JTPA initiative launched in June 1986.
Youth 2000 is a nationwide "call to action"between now and the year 2000.
It is designed to enlist the involvement of all sectors of society in helping vulnerable youth to achieve social and economic selfsufficiency and fullfill their potential as contributing members of society.
The need for the Youth 2000 campaign is clear: on humanitarian grounds and in order for the country to meet the challenge of an increasingly competitive world economy.
Youth 2000 brings the Departments of Labor and Health and Human Services together to focus State and local attention on opportunities and challenges facing the nation and its young people through the end of this century.
ETA regional offices worked with State and community leaders during the year to promote public awareness of youth-related issues and continued efforts to stimulate new dialogue, an important step in mobilizing resources to address issues associated with at-risk youth, including illiteracy, failure to complete high school, teen pregnancy, and alcohol and other drug abuse.
The largest federally funded system of job training programs is authorized by JTPA.
Summaries of PY 1987 JTPA activities, primarily by title, follow.
More than 1,331,100 youth and adults received a variety of employment-related services through State and local programs under JTPA Title II-A in program year 1987.
Expenditures for the period totaled $1.9 billion.
Title II-A provides for a system of block grants to the States to support training and employment programs.
States retain 22 percent of the funds for statewide activities, and allocate the balance to local service delivery areas (SDAs), the districts into which the nation is divided for JTPA administrative purposes.
SDA expenditures for the 12-month period totaled $1.6 billion, more than 40 percent of which was spent on services to youth (16 to 22 years of age).
Females accounted for 54 percent and minorities for 50 percent of participants in SDA programs.
Twenty-seven percent of the participants were high school dropouts, and 26 percent were receiving welfare.
Sixty-one percent of those who left SDA programs entered employment at an average hourly wage of $4.84.
Youth terminees had a positive termination rate of 80 percent.
Over 90 percent of SDA program enrollees were economically disadvantaged.
Nearly 639,900 youth participated in the 1988 Summer Youth Employment and Training Program under Title II-B of JTPA.
Expenditures totaled $698.6 million.
The summer program provides disadvantaged youth with job opportunities, training, and educational services.
The 1986 JTPA amendments relating to summer activities were first implemented during the 1987 program, and refined and institutionalized throughout the system in the 1988 program.
The amendments require each SDA to identify participants who do not meet locally determined educational standards.
Those falling below such standards are enrolled in a summer remedial education component which provides them with the basic skills needed for regular academic work during the school year.
During PY 1987, Title III dislocated worker programs served nearly 183,000 persons who had been laid off from their jobs.
Seventy-one percent of the participants who left the program during the year got jobs at an average hourly wage of $7.10.
Expenditures came to more than $172 million, 81 percent of which was from formula allotments to the States.
The remaining dollars financed special projects funded from the Secretary's National Reserve Account.
Proposed by Governors, these projects are usually directed toward specific groups of dislocated workers, particularly those affected by one or more plant closings.
The Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance legislation, a version of the Administration's proposed Worker Adjustment Program, was included in the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, which was signed into law by the President on August 23, 1988.
The new program replaced Title III of JTPA, effective July 1, 1989.
Under the new Title III program, 80 percent of the total funds are to be distributed by formula to the States.
Fifty percent of the State allotment must be allocated to sub-State areas, under a Statedetermined formula, for training and basic readjustment services.
A Governor may retain up to 40 percent of the State allotment to establish and maintain a rapid response capability and for other State responsibilities.
The remaining 10 percent of the State's allotment may be retained by the Governor for distribution during the first nine months of the program year to sub-State areas in need.
Up to 20 percent of the total funds may be reserved for Federal readjustment responsibilities, including the Secretary's National Reserve Account.
These funds are to be used for mass layoffs, industry-wide and multi-State projects, demonstration projects, and other activities.
Approximately 33,300 Indians and other Native Americans received a wide variety of job-related services in PY 1987, at a cost of $60.8 million, under Title IV of JTPA.
Twenty-nine percent of the participants were enrolled in classroom training, 10 percent in onthe-job training, 22 percent in work experience, and 6 percent in community service employment.
Another 33 percent received various supportive services.
Title IV programs for Native Americans are funded through grants to Indian tribes, other Native American communities, and various related organizations.
There was a significant improvement in grantee performance, as measured by established performance standards, in PY 1987, a period during which ETA officials made approximately 100 on-site visits to grantees to monitor performance and participated in six regional grantee-sponsored meetings, providing technical assistance and information.
During the 12-month period, ETA designated 186 grantees for PY 1988, approved seven grantee community benefit projects, and continued to promote literacy projects and linkages between Native American grantees and other human resource programs.
Other activities authorized by JTPA Title IV include migrant and seasonal farmworker (MSFW) programs, which served more than 46,800 persons at a total cost of $56 million in PY 1987.
Some 8,900 participants received classroom training, 7,600 were enrolled in on-the-job training, and 1,700 were placed in work experience positions.
During the year, ETA developed guidelines for acceptance of newly-legalized agricultural workers into MSFW programs.
The agency also continued its emphasis on youth employability enhancement, and some 8,000 participants, aged 14-21 (17 percent of the total participants), took part in such activities.
About 95 percent of MSFW program grantees have formal agreements with private institutions, such as vocational centers.
Two grantees received funding for literacy training demonstration projects in program year 1988, and $5 million in Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) funds was transferred to farmworker grantees to provide emergency assistance in drought-stricken States.
During program year 1987, the Job Corps operated 106 training centers at a cost of $679 million, providing a wide range of training, education, and support services, primarily in residential centers, for disadvantaged youth aged 16 to 21.
Job Corps is also authorized by Title IV of JTPA.
Average enrollment at any time during the year was 38,700, and Job Corps centers served approximately 65,000 new enrollees during the period.
The majority of Job Corps centers continued to be 100 percent residential, but 46 centers operated combined residential/nonresidential programs.
Nonresidential enrollment was 9.9 percent during the program year.
Major efforts focused on implementation of a series of pilot and demonstration projects designed to identify ways to increase program outcomes and reduce costs.
This initiative, referred to as "Job Corps II,"includes such activities as the establishment of two nonresidential Job Corps centers, and a project that will increase selected centers' capacity through the operation of evening classes, enabling enrollees to hold part-time jobs while in training.
In addition, the Job Corps II initiative focuses on the development of stronger programmatic linkages between Job Corps centers and local JTPA programs, arrangements for dependent children, and efforts to enhance services to foster care youth.
Preliminary assessments of major Job Corps II projects were conducted during PY 1986.
Final evaluations of all projects will be completed during the next few years.
Jump Start to Language Power, a language arts program, was piloted and evaluated during the year.
The program aims to improve corpsmembers' communications skills through the use of directed and recreational reading, journal writing, and group discussion.
Evaluation findings showed the program improved reading performance in certain learning environments and was useful as a supplement to the upper levels of Job Corps'graded reading program.
Competency-based Corpsmember Activity Guides (CAGs) were developed for 10 occupational training programs representing about two-thirds of the total training slots in Job Corps.
Industry Advisory Groups (IAGs), consisting of Job Corps instructors and employer representatives, reviewed the CAGs to insure that current needs of industry would be met.
Training Achivement Records (TARs) were also designed to reflect the tasks included in the CAGs and to provide a means of recording the competencies achieved by each corpsmember.
Finally, work began on developing TARs and identifying competency-based curricula for Job Corps' remaining occupational training programs.
Because PY 1987 was the second year of the two-year JTPA planning cycle, national performance standards for Titles II-A and III remained unchanged from PY 1986.
A technical assistance guide was updated to provide information to help States set local Title II-A standards that account for SDA differences in participant characteristics and labor market conditions.
An important feature of the annual training conference was a forum for participants to identify problems with the performance management system for ETA's consideration in connection with the next year's revision process.
PY 1987 was the first full program year cycle during which a new model-based process was used for setting and assessing individually adjusted Title IV performance standards for the 186 Native American grantees and the 53 migrant and seasonal farmworker grantees.
This cycle includes use of the model-based standards in the planning, operational, and assessment phases based on final reports from the grantees.
ETA also developed and implemented updated model-based PY 1988 standards for both sets of program grantees during PY 1987.
ETA continued its development and implementation of performance standards for Job Corps centers by adding modelbased standards for learning gains in mathematics and reading in PY 1987.
A series of training sessions was conducted for regional and center staff.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP) provided part-time jobs for more than 100,000 older persons in PY 1987, with an appropriation of $336 million.
Over 20 percent of the participants moved from their part-time community service positions into nonsubsidized jobs.
In managing the program, ETA continued to emphasize coordinating SCSEP activities with those of other employment programs, particularly with sponsors of JTPA's 3 percent set-aside for older workers and with the Job Corps.
The SCSEP is authorized by the Older Americans Act of 1965, as amended.
ETA launched the Apprenticeship 2000 initiative in December 1987.
Its purpose is to review the system and determine its future role in meeting America's needs for a skilled workforce.
In this connection, an issue paper was published in the Federal Register, followed by three public meetings (in San Francisco, Chicago, and Washington, D.C.).
Response to the paper and comments made at the public meetings were summarized in a report, The Public Speaks.
The initiative also includes a research program, consisting of short- and longer-term projects that examine in detail a series of key issues associated with apprenticeship and its future role.
A comprehensive report, including recommendations for expanding and improving the concept over the next several years, is to be issued in 1989.
As part of the on-going effort to improve the quality of existing training, Federal staff reviewed on-site and provided technical assistance to over 2,100 apprenticeship programs in FY 1988.
ETA continued to adapt the National Apprenticeship System to changing technological developments by approving as apprenticeable additional occupations (examples: nondestructive tester, arson and bomb investigator, wildland fire fighter specialist, fire apparatus engineer, stage technician, and architectural coatings finisher).
The agency encouraged sponsors to consider performance-based/competency-based programs, and revised apprenticeship standards to keep them current.
During Program Year 1987, 18.4 million persons registered with the public employment service, 6.6 million received some reportable service, and 3.8 million applicants were either placed in a job or obtained one after receiving some services.
Labor exchange expenditures for the period totaled some $728 million.
ETA is reviewing ways in which the employment service (ES) system can better meet the needs of the changing labor market between now and the year 2000.
In PY 1987, ETA began planning for new initiatives, including demonstrations that would test innovative and exemplary practices to meet anticipated labor market requirements of the future.
The projects, funded in PY 1988, address improved services, private sector employer involvement, and an enhanced State role in the development of ES policy.
ETA also participated in the planning for three ES information exchange forums, in conjunction with the Interstate Conference of Employment Security Agencies (ICESA).
These forums, held in PY 1988, provided national, State, and local policymakers and planners an opportunity to share information on successful, innovative approaches developed by State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs).
Forums focused on efforts that link ES activities with other public and private sector partners in the human resource delivery system.
Under the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program in calendar year 1988, SESAs issued some 497,300 certifications documenting an employer's eligibility for a tax credit for hiring workers from one of nine “targeted"groups, such as economically disadvantaged youth.
Many SESAs simplified their procedures to improve TJTC processing.
A revised TJTC handbook was issued.
It updates procedures and reporting requirements and emphasizes the responsibilities of the SESAs for processing requests for certification.
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act and in conjunction with its affiliated SESAs, ETA has the responsibility for certifying that the use of certain categories of foreign workers will not adversely affect job opportunities, wages, and working conditions of U.S. workers.
Such certification is required as a condition to issuance of visas by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.)
In calendar year 1988, 23,745 temporary agricultural jobs were certified to be filled by nonimmigrant foreign workers.
In some 45 States, the Employers' National Job Service Committee (ENJSC), in cooperation with over 1,300 local Job Service Employer Committees, provides information to help SESAs meet the needs of employers and to facilitate the referral and placement of job applicants.
In FY 1988, over 30,000 employers volunteered their services to this effort, and collaborated with local offices to streamline services, implement innovative methods, and prepare for changing labor market needs.
To increase efficiency, and ultimately job placement, ETA and DOL's Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans'Employment and Training consolidated their agreements with the ENJSC, eliminated duplication of effort, and reduced the reporting burden.
To comply with requirements of JTPA, the Interstate Job Bank (IJB) compiles listings of hard-to-fill jobs identified by SESAs and distributes them among more than 2,000 local ES offices, and some libraries and colleges.
Over 17,000 job openings are publicized each week.
In FY 1988, almost 90,000 new jobs were listed, and IJB staff was involved in followup activity for over 9,500 applicant referrals.
As SESAs improved their automation capabilities, the number using telecommunication to obtain the IJB listing increased in FY 1988 to 16, from 13.
Other States use computer tape exchange to list and obtain job opening information.)
The IJB Center also supported a new Multi-State Job Bank Pilot Project in five contiguous States, providing applicant self-search capability via computer terminal to all job listings in the five-State area.
More than 1 million individuals were registered for the Work Incentive (WIN) Program in FY 1988, through both regular and demonstration programs.
About 258,100 of these persons found unsubsidized jobs and 172,200 earned enough to be removed from welfare rolls.
WIN's budget for the year totaled $92.6 million.
WIN's objective is to restore Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) applicants and recipients, and their families, to economic independence and enable them to assume a useful role in the community.
States use various approaches to accomplish this objective.
Program (workfare), on-the-job training, and vocational and classroom training.
The program also provides or arranges for necessary child care and other social services.
The WIN Program coordinates operations with related employment and social programs, such as JTPA, vocational education, and the Social Services Block Grants.
Regular WIN programs are jointly administered by the Department of Labor, through ETA, and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), through the Family Support Administration (FSA).
At the State level, regular WIN programs are managed jointly by the SESAs and the State welfare agencies.
States may also choose to conduct a WIN demonstration program which is administered solely by FSA and the State welfare agency.
By the end of FY 1988, 29 States (including the District of Columbia) operated demonstration programs, while 25 States (including Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands) continued to operate regular WIN programs.
The WIN population differs substantially from the mainstream workforce.
Of the WIN client group, 79 percent are women, 54 percent are minorities, and slightly more than half have less than 12 years of school.
The WIN Program will terminate on October 1, 1990, to be replaced by the new JOBS Program, administered by HHS.
States may elect to begin the JOBS Program after July 1, 1989.
During calendar year 1987, 17.1 million initial claims for unemployment benefits were filed with SESAs.
There were 97.1 million weeks compensated for total unemployment and 8.1 million weeks compensated for partial unemployment during the period.
Revenues collected from the States for the program totalled $17.6 billion and benefits paid totalled $14 billion.
Fiscal year 1988 saw improvement in State benefit financing and repayment of loans from the Federal Unemployment Trust Fund.
These loans had peaked as of March 31, 1984, when 26 States had outstanding loans totaling $14 billion.
During fiscal year 1988, lower rates of insured unemployment and improved financial structures combined to permit many States to make voluntary repayments in lieu of or in addition to recoveries occurring by way of the reduced Federal unemployment tax offset credit to employers.
As of August 31, 1988, two States had unpaid loans.
The balance of outstanding loans had been reduced to $1.2 billion (all interest free).
Trust fund balances of States not in debtor status as of June 30, 1988, amounted to $26.7 billion.
ETA continued several important unemployment insurance (UI) initiatives during the fiscal year, specifically, improving the program's integrity and testing ways to accelerate and smooth the transition to reemployment for UI recipients, especially the longterm unemployed.
ETA continued the development and implementation of a comprehensive, integrated approach to improve the accuracy and timeliness of UI program activities, including the collection of revenues and the payment of benefits.
The principal component of this effort is the UI Quality Control (QC) system.
The Unemployment Insurance Quality Control Program has been operating as a required activity since October 1987.
The Department has emphasized efforts to strengthen the program's ability to help improve SESA programs.
In particular, SESAs have been encouraged to use the data for program improvement and to this end provided resources, flexibility, and training and technical assistance.
As part of DOL's commitment to a comprehensive QC Program, initial stages of developing a revenue QC program were undertaken in 1988.
After an information-gathering and policyconsultation phase, a Federal Register notice on design issues will be the next step prior to prototype development, which will be carried out with contractor, DOL regional, and SESA technical support.
The UI program has provided temporary income support to unemployed workers for over 50 years.
These payments have provided workers who have been gainfully employed, and who have lost their jobs through no fault of their own, with part of the wages that they would have otherwise earned.
UI payments, which generally last for up to 26 weeks, were designed to sustain these workers through temporary periods of unemployment due to slack work caused by recessions and short-term downturns in the economy.
In recent years, however, changes in the U.S. economy have created new labor market problems that have made the reemployment of structurally unemployed workers a key issue for the UI system.
The goal is to find innovative, cost-effective ways to reduce structural unemployment, increase economic activity, and speed up the return of unemployed workers to productive jobs.
To assist structurally unemployed workers--workers who are likely to exhaust their UI benefits and have difficulty finding new jobs--ETA has begun to review a number of nontraditional approaches to the UI system.
These alternative approaches involve several demonstration projects and include the following reemployment services: job search assistance, referral to training, relocation assistance, monetary incentives to search for work faster, and grants for self-employment.
Washington Reemployment Bonus Demonstration Project The Washington Reemployment Bonus Demonstration Project replicates and refines an Illinois experiment to test different reemployment bonus amounts and different durations of eligibility for the bonus.
No additional reemployment services were offered in this demonstration; only variations of the reemployment bonus have been tested.
Enrollment in this bonus demonstration ended in November 1988.
A total of about 14,000 unemployment insurance recipients were offered reemployment bonuses in 21 Job Service Centers throughout the State.
Project operations will continue for approximately another nine months.
At its conclusion, about 2,000 UI beneficiaries will have accelerated their return to work and collected a reemployment bonus averaging approximately $650 per worker.
The project will be evaluated to determine if there is a cost-effective approach to offering reemployment bonuses to unemployed workers.
Pennsylvania Reemployment Bonus Demonstration Project This is a direct follow-up to the New Jersey demonstration.
The Pennsylvania project provides one of the three reemployment service packages from the New Jersey project: a combination of job search assistance (JSA) and the reemployment bonus.
This strategy is based on the fact that UI recipients--particularly those who are structurally unemployed workers--often lack basic job search skills and delay their search for new employment.
The combination of JSA and the reemployment bonus is designed to provide both job search skills and the motivation for intensive job search, thus promoting rapid reemployment.
Washington Self-Employment Demonstration Project The Washington Self-Employment Demonstration Project is one of two efforts being conducted under the Unemployment Insurance Self-Employment Demonstration.
The other effort involves three States. See below.)
Designed to encourage selected participants to set up their own small businesses, the demonstration involves making available to claimants at the beginning of their period of unemployment all or part of the benefits they would receive while looking for a job.
The idea of using the UI system to promote selfemployment is based on programs in several Western European countries--particularly Great Britain and France--that encourage the unemployed to create jobs for themselves.
These programs provide grants and other assistance to unemployed workers who want to start new business ventures.
Evaluation of these European programs, however, have provided only limited information on benefits and costs and their applicability to the United States.
Three-State Self-Employment Demonstration Project On December 22, 1987, the Congress passed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987, which includes a "Demonstration Program to Provide Self-Employment Allowances for Eligible Individuals"(Section 9152).
The law requires the Secretary of Labor to carry out a self-employment demonstration project, enter into agreements with three States that will each enroll participants in the demonstration for a period of three years, analyze the benefits and costs of the demonstration, and submit reports to Congress.
Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Oregon are participating in the project.
A total of 1,019 petitions for assistance were filed with the Department under the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) Program during fiscal year 1988, a decrease from the 1,877 received during the previous year.
Some 60,920 workers who lost their jobs, or whose hours of work were reduced because of increased imports, were certified as eligible to apply for TAA benefits and reemployment services, compared with about 115,350 the prior year.
Many of these workers were separated from employment in firms manufacturing apparel, electronics, and automobiles.
During the 12-month period, an estimated $190 million in trade readjustment allowances (TRA) was paid to certified workers, compared with $212 million during the previous fiscal year.
Over $54 million of TAA program funds were allocated for worker training, job search, and relocation assistance in FY 1988.
The figure was $50 million in FY 1987.
The TAA program has been considerably modified since it was originally authorized by the Trade Act of 1974.
The most recent amendments to the Trade Act were contained in the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, which extended the program to 1993 and made significant changes in coverage and requirements.
Under the amendments, eligibility was expanded to cover workers with independent firms engaged in exploration and drilling in the oil and gas industry.
Eligibility would also be expanded to workers or firms that provide essential goods or services to directly affected firms within the period of three years after the date of enactment if an import fee to fund TAA programs is imposed within two years.
Also under the amendments, as of November 21, 1988, all workers otherwise eligible must have completed or be enrolled in a training program as a condition for receipt of TRA (unless waived under specified conditions).
This provision replaced the job search program requirement instituted by the 1985 amendments.
Costs of training were made an entitlement to workers and remedial education can now also be approved as a training activity.
Several other changes were made to: determine eligibility on the basis of a worker's most recent separation from employment; authorize payment of TRA during scheduled breaks in training; specify procedures in making payments for on-the-job training; permit the commingling of training funds; provide benefit information to workers; and require that the TAA program be coordinated with other dislocated worker programs.
The bulk of labor force entrants between now and the year 2000 is expected to consist of groups that have historically been underutilized or have experienced labor market barriers, including women, minorities, and immigrants.
At the same time, the employment base of the economy is changing in structure from manufacturing to services, and jobs in the new service industries will require higher skill levels than jobs of today.
These important labor force trends were identified in an ETAfunded research effort, part of the Secretary's initiative for Workforce 2000 which was established in PY 1985.
They provided the framework for a major portion of the PY 1987 research and demonstration resource allocation which placed emphasis on Workforce 2000 issues and five related areas: workplace literacy, youth, worker adjustment, women-families-welfare, and improving employment and training programs.
Studies and demonstrations related to educational requirements, literacy training methods, and school dropouts were undertaken or continued to meet the challenge of increasing proportions of disadvantaged job entrants into a labor market which demands higher skill levels.
New projects included the establishment of alternative schools in seven communities across the country and programs to increase the literacy levels of particular groups, among them low-income single mothers, older dislocated workers, migrant and seasonal farmworkers, and persons whose native language is not English.
Projects were undertaken to serve persons needing skills upgrading (including displaced homemakers, public housing residents, offenders, and homeless persons) and to aid industries in need of a skilled workforce.
Demonstrations were conducted to improve delivery of training and employment services, and research was funded in such areas as future trends in women's pay and business practices for child care.
In addition, some special demonstrations were conducted to enhance the partnership concept that is represented by DOL/ETA's working relationships with business, labor, and community-based organizations.
On the evaluation side, ETA continued to fund the Job Training Quarterly Survey (formerly known as the Job Training Longitudinal Survey) to monitor JTPA program participation on an ongoing basis.
The survey provides data on Titles II-A and III participants.
The data demonstrated that the program served the intended clientele in PY 1987: more than 90 percent of the Title II-A enrollees were economically disadvantaged, over 40 percent were youth, and slightly more than half were female.
ETA also began field implementation in 15 local service delivery areas of a major social experiment to measure the net impact of diverse JTPA Title II-A treatments (such as classroom training and on-the-job training) on participants.
The five-year study focuses on the post-program labor market experience of JTPA participants and includes random selection as part of its classic experimental design.
ETA's principal policy and planning activities in PY 1987 supported two interrelated goals: improving the quality of the workforce and increasing the effectiveness of job training programs.
To reach these objectives, ETA supported a number of joint ventures which linked the JTPA program with the resources of other Federal departments and thus broadened and improved coordination between federally supported human resource programs.
Focusing on mutual concerns and goals of Federal agencies is an important way to increase ETA's impact on the pressing issues identified in the Workforce 2000 research effort.
ETA organized the staff work for a national conference on "Building a Quality Workforce,"held in July 1988 and attended by some 60 of the nation's top business, labor, education, and government leaders.
The meeting was sponsored jointly by the Departments of Labor, Education (DOE), and Commerce.
Conferees focused on three basic topics: the extent of the gap between the needs of business and the quality of basic skills young people currently bring to the workplace; education's response to this challenge; and ways that business, education, and the community can work more effectively together to provide quality education to young people and a quality workforce for the Nation.
Following the national conference and issuance of the related ETA publication Building a Quality Workforce, conferences and seminars on the same theme were held in communities across the country.
In addition, the Department of Labor (ETA) and DOE jointly published The Bottom Line: Basic Skills in the Workplace, a guidebook for employers and others engaged in training that describes how to identify employee training needs and how to set up a basic skills program.
ETA began planning in PY 1987 for a major review of the JTPA experience to date, which was conducted by a 38-member advisory committee composed of experts in the employment and training field.
The agency first developed a "white paper'defining the specific issues that would form the agenda for the review.
Regional and State meetings were then organized around issues identified in the white paper, which was published in the Federal Register.
Based on its own deliberations and comments received, the committee in March 1989 issued a report entitled Working Capital: JTPA Investments for the 90's.
The report summarized the committee's review of JTPA, endorsed the program's basic mission and management structure, and made recommendations for increasing the productivity of the program.
Policy and technical assistance were provided by ETA to Administration officials and to Congressional members and staff on key legislation that was enacted in the 100th Congress, including: the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 which incorporated both a version of the Administration's Worker Readjustment Program initiative and revisions to the Trade Adjustment Assistance Program; the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act; the Family Support Act; the Jobs for Employable Dependent Individuals Act; and technical corrections tax legislation, which extended the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit through calendar year 1989.
The agency also prepared and transmitted to Congress a legislative proposal for the year-round training of at-risk youth under JTPA.
Department officials testified at several hearings held on the plan.
In May 1988, ETA hosted the sixth biennial Belmont Conference, whose participants represented five developed Englishspeaking countries: the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the U.S.
The Belmont agenda concentrated on broad topics of common concern, such as how to enhance worker productivity, improve worker flexibility, and help stimulate economic growth and job creation.
The discussion pointed up a remarkable similarity in the direction the five countries have taken to deal with current labor market problems and in the concern conferees expressed about the labor market consequences of demographic and economic changes projected over the next dozen years.
Preparation of the Training and Employment Report of the Secretary.
In PY 1987, ETA implemented a new oversight system for JTPA which regional office staff followed in making approximately 330 State level and some 700 sub-State area reviews.
The new system consists of both compliance and management reviews.
Compliance reviews address four broad areas of JTPA: administrative and financial management, program management and services, the summer youth program, and the Title III national reserve program for dislocated workers.
These reviews focus on statutory and regulatory issues and are conducted to obtain information necessary to determine conformance with the legislation.
Management reviews, on the other hand, are conducted to gather information on goal-setting, planning, and the actual operation of JTPA programs within the context of the State or local institutional structure.
In addition to the JTPA reviews, regional staff conducted 54 compliance reviews of Wagner-Peyser (employment service) base grants and approximately 175 compliance reviews of Wagner-Peyser reimbursable grants.
Approximately 25 program reviews were also conducted of Trade Adjustment Assistance Programs.
ETA issued final determinations, decisions, and responses to waiver requests for 320 audits in FY 1988.
During the same period, 443 contracts and grants funded by the national office were closed.
Approximately 255 actions remained pending for reasons such as appeals of contract or grant officer determinations, unresolved audit issues, pending debt collection actions, or pending requests for the establishment of indirect cost rates.
During the period, 21 internal control reviews, surveys, and management reviews were conducted in the process of carrying out ETA's responsibilities under the Federal Managers'Financial Integrity Act.
A total of 821 pre-award reviews were completed on potential ETA contractors or grantees, and 44 investigations, either internal or external, were conducted to determine compliance with the applicable legislative and regulatory requirements.
Approximately 600 incidents of alleged fraud, abuse, or other criminal activity were reported through the ETA Incident Report system or the General Accounting Office/Office of Inspector General Hotline system during FY 88.
Corrective action was initiated when appropriate.
Onsite reviews were conducted independent of program office activities on a sample of 33 national office programs.
These reviews focused on program operations and financial systems.
The primary issues identified were misclassification of costs, lack of cost allocation plans, inadequate documentation for verification of participant eligibility, and failure to follow government travel regulations.
The appropriate program office initiated requests for corrective action where necessary.
During program year 1987, ETA collected approximately $28 million in cash for debts established primarily through the audit resolution process, and more than $17 million in debts were referred to the Department of Justice for litigation or other debt collection followup.
In addition, ETA recovered for the Federal UI Trust Fund almost $10 million for debts established through the UI Federal share audit resolution process.
In fiscal year 1988, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) continued to produce and improve the quality of the national economic indicators and other essential statistics on employment, unemployment, prices, compensation, working conditions, productivity, technology, and economic growth.
Completed the reclassification of all establishments covered by unemployment insurance in accord with the new Standard Industrial Classification system, developed new estimating procedures for local area unemployment statistics, and completed a special study of child-care policies in business establishments.
Updated the base periods for consumer, producer, and international price indexes, expanded the publication of data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, prepared a report on more accurately measuring the cost of living for older Americans for use by the Senate Special Committee on Aging, introduced a new industry-based Stage of Process system for the Producer Price Index, and continued to develop new price indexes for the service sector of the economy.
Added several new wage and compensation change series to the Employment Cost Index.
Began to implement plans for a new survey of white-collar pay, which had been requested by Congress in 1987.
Began a comprehensive redesign of its occupational illness and injury statistical system.
Completed labor and multifactor productivity measures for additional industries, updated measures of productivity in the Government sector and in foreign countries, introduced new multifactor productivity measures, and published additional technology outlook reports.
Supported the Secretary's Workforce 2000 Project by issuing a series of publications providing projections of the labor force and industry and occupational employment.
Sought to improve the quality of its data by creating a Collection Procedures Research Laboratory to conduct research on data collection methods.
The Bureau continued to meet the labor force data needs of the press, business, academia, Congress, and government agencies.
Analyses included the regular monthly summaries of employment and quarterly reports on women, families, weekly earnings, and minorities.
In 1988, this program made key improvements in survey quality and data collection technology.
In response to an increased demand for timely, accurate data on current economic trends and emerging social issues, the Bureau developed a quick-response capability for survey design, data collection, and publication of summary results.
With this capability, BLS launched a survey of anti-drug programs and policies in business establishments and completed the final report on last year's survey of employer-provided child care benefits.
The Assistant Secretary for Policy will use the anti-drug survey, which featured computer-assisted telephone interviewing techniques, to prepare a 1989 report to Congress.
The Local Area Unemployment Statistics program continued to improve its estimating procedures.
Working with cooperating State agencies, the Bureau developed and tested econometric models to derive estimates of unemployment in States for which there are not sufficient data from the Current Population Survey.
The Bureau plans to introduce these new procedures in early 1989.
Another effort to improve BLS statistical output centered on upgrading the timeliness, quality, and detail of the data on U.S. employers.
During 1988, the Bureau contracted with 33 State Employment Security Agencies to modify their computer systems to provide establishment-level reporting and additional data elements.
The additional information will give BLS more current sample frame data for business surveys and the necessary data elements to conduct longitudinal analyses.
Staff economists Michael Horrigan and Steven Haugen analyzed an important topical issue in their Monthly Labor Review article, "The Declining Middle Class Thesis: A Sensitivity Analysis."
Other staff analyses included reports on general conditions in the economy and the labor force; studies of particular demographic groups, such as women and Hispanics, and examinations of the issues of educational attainment and school dropouts.
The Bureau continued to improve the quality, coverage, and timeliness of its program to measure and analyze expenditure and price data.
The Consumer Expenditure Survey program introduced a new publication series which makes these data available quarterly.
Consistent with Federal statistical policy, the Consumer Price Index program updated the base period of its indexes to 1982-84.
The index also introduced a correction factor which takes into account the effect of deterioration of houses in measuring price trends in housing.
In response to concerns about the inflation experience of older Americans, BLS prepared for the Senate Special Committee on Aging a special report on the actions necessary to develop a new Consumer Price Index for the elderly.
A major achievement of the Producer Price Index program was the introduction of an industry-based Stage of Process Price System which applies input/output transaction information to portray the flow of price and cost elements through various sectors of the mining and manufacturing economy.
The program also conducted a pilot survey to develop price indexes for electronic computing equipment designed to produce a quarterly, experimental index in 1989.
In addition, the Producer Price Index program updated the base period of its indexes to 1982.
A major initiative in price measurement was the development of monthly measures of price changes for products in U.S. international trade; these indexes will be available in 1989 as part of the International Price program.
The International Price program introduced foreign currency indexes to facilitate analysis of the effect of currency rate changes on price change.
In addition, the program updated the base period of its indexes to 1985 and reweighted them using 1985 trade data.
Both the Producer Price Index and International Price programs continued to develop new indexes for the service sector of the economy, primarily in the transportation and communications areas.
A Bureau reorganization in 1988 combined the Office of Wages and Industrial Relations with the Office of Occupational Safety and Health Statistics to form the Office of Compensation and Working Conditions.
The Bureau also published a new ECI series on compensation cost levels by geographic region, union status, and occupation within industry and began testing for the planned integration in 1990 of the ECI and Employee Benefits Survey.
Bureau staff continued to improve the methods and scope of several other compensation surveys.
The Employee Benefits Survey reported on paid leave and employee insurance and pension plans in State and local governments for the first time; the private sector component of this survey was expanded to include all services industries and all establishments employing 100 workers or more.
Activities to convert the Area Wage Survey program from 70 to 90 areas continued.
To improve the efficiency of survey operations and conserve resources, staff developed plans to coordinate white-collar pay data collection with field operations for other wage surveys.
Work also continued on development of the Bureau's new, broad-based survey of white-collar pay and benefits to cover more occupations and nonwage cash benefits.
The Bureau published results of three first-time surveys during the year: white-collar pay in the service industries; employment in the temporary-help services industry, and business contracting-out practices (based on responses to questions added to wage surveys in several manufacturing industries).
BLS launched a redesign of its occupational injury and illness statistical system, fielding a series of feasibility studies in 1988 and planning four pilot tests for early 1989.
The redesigned system will uniformly detail, for the first time, the characteristics of injuries and illnesses and the demographics of workers involved.
Nationwide results of the latest Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses were reported in a news release and subsequently published in a comprehensive bulletin.
Using data from the Annual Survey and from a Supplementary Data System based on State workers' compensation records, BLS developed separate estimates for most States and territories.
Efforts to review and improve employer recordkeeping practices and survey concepts and definitions included some 100 training sessions as well as a draft report on findings of the Keystone Center, a nonprofit organization that seeks consensus among opposing parties in workplace safety issues.
BLS further strengthened and expanded the program of measurement and analysis of productivity and technology--topics of substantial public interest.
Productivity measures are widely regarded as major indicators of U.S. economic progress, and the Bureau refined and extended the series of published measures to provide broader coverage.
Additional industries for which BLS published labor productivity measures were: men's and boys' suits and coats; steel foundries; grocery stores; retail bakeries; radio, television, and music stores; and household appliance stores.
The Bureau now issues a total of 163 separate productivity measures in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
The Bureau also made progress in measuring productivity in the Government sector, updating measures for the Federal Government to fiscal year 1987.
These measures currently include 20 years of historical data for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies, representing 69 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
In addition, BLS updated measures for several State and local government activities.
The Bureau made substantial progress in the measurement and interpretation of multifactor productivity trends.
Multifactor measures for major sectors were extended through 1987 and to 1986 for 2-digit manufacturing groups.
In addition, BLS began publishing multifactor productivity estimates at the individual industry level, introducing measures for the steel and motor vehicles and equipment industries.
The Bureau continued studying the effects of changing levels of education and experience in the work force and cyclical movements of productivity growth.
Staff analyzed the effects of research and development expenditures on productivity growth and developed a series of hours at work/hours paid ratios.
Analysts published papers on the relationship between age and productivity change and on improved measurement of the amount of capital available per worker.
In the international area, BLS updated trends in manufacturing labor productivity and unit labor costs for 12 countries and continued research toward the development of multifactor productivity measures for Germany and Japan.
BLS also updated the measures of comparative levels of hourly compensation costs for production workers in 34 countries and 40 manufacturing industries and the series on international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in 10 industrial countries.
In response to continued public interest, the Bureau assessed the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Staff prepared reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 20 years for four additional American industries--contract construction, railroad transportation, air transportation, and petroleum pipeline transportation.
In support of the Secretary's Workforce 2000 Project, the Bureau issued a series of publications on projections of the labor force and industry and occupational employment.
The 1988-89 Occupational Outlook Handbook, a biennial career guidance book, included detailed descriptions of occupations employing 80 percent of all workers in the economy.
Articles in the Occupational Outlook Quarterly featured graphical presentations of the the Bureau's projections to the Year 2000 and summaries of the job outlook for each occupation covered in the Occupational Outlook Handbook, as well as discussions of the outlook for college graduates through the Year 2000 and the employment patterns of recent college graduates by field of training.
The periodical also included articles on the relationship of foreign languages, English, and social studies to specific careers.
Staff significantly revised the 1988 edition of the biennial bulletin, Occupational Projections and Training Data, to provide information for education and training officials engaged in program planning.
The bulletin featured a new ranking of occupations by employment growth; employment size; earnings; and unemployment rate, factors used to determine the merits of expanding some education and training programs.
The bulletin presenting comprehensive data on the Bureau's Year 2000 projections included information on assumptions and methods used to develop the projections.
BLS also prepared and made available evaluations of earlier projections of the labor force and industry output and employment for 1985.
The Bureau continued to incorporate advances in computing technology in its information systems and realized economies from several large scale contracts.
Staff began to develop a data extraction and exchange system using a Britton-Lee database machine and a Microsoft Windows program.
This software will improve access to LABSTAT data and will be used with other Bureau databases stored on Britton-Lee machines.
BLS acquired software enabling users to translate files prepared in various formats into Microsoft WORD.
Another package translates Microsoft WORD into WORDPERFECT, facilitating document interchange with the Departmental Executive Computer Network.
The Bureau completed the national portion of the BLS Local Area Network with the installation of leased data communications lines in each BLS Regional Office to the BLS Local Area Network in Washington, DC.
Network applications include survey processing, Bureau administration, office automation, mainframe connectivity, and links to the Executive Computer Network.
Work continued on electronic data dissemination initiatives.
The Bureau established standards for "desktop"publishing equipment, which the Department also adopted.
The BLS system makes it possible to integrate text, tables, and graphics and to lay out pages for documents to be circulated within the Bureau.
Scanners permit the importation of text and graphics.
The Bureau began exploring the possibility of disseminating data on CD-ROM and experienced growth in its existing programs which offer data on tape, online, and on diskette.
The Monthly Labor Review received a Blue Pencil Award from the National Association of Government Communicators.
The February 1988 issue of the Review featured retrospective articles by former Labor Secretaries on the occasion of the Department's 75th Anniversary.
During the 1988 fiscal year, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) worked alongside both labor and industry seeking new and better ways to protect workers by reducing or eliminating workplace hazards.
The agency carried out its responsibilities by utilizing fully all of the problem-solving tools :iven to it by Congress.
These tools include the ability to set tandards, enforce compliance, approve state programs, provide consultation, offer education and training, and foster the creation of special projects.
OSHA also continued its efforts to enhance the ability of government, labor, and industry to improve workplace safety and health conditions.
During FY 88, OSHA continued to use an approach to standards setting designed to ensure that any standards promulgated would be protective, flexible, and cost-effective.
Five final rules and three proposed rules were published.
OSHA issued a final rule on Grain Handling Facilities on December 31, 1987.
It was designed to minimize or prevent employee deaths and injuries due to fire, explosion, and other safety hazards that exist in grain handling facilities.
This is a new regulation, not the revision of a current one.
A series of devastating explosions, occuring in late 1977 and early 1978, focused national attention on the destructiveness of explosions in grain handling facilities.
These disasters resulted in 62 worker deaths and 54 injuries.
Employees in these facilities continue to be exposed to fires and explosions as well as other safety hazards such as the dangers of entry into bins, silos and tanks.
The requirements in this final rule are intended to reduce accidents and injuries by means of work practices and procedures; through the proper handling and use of equipment, training, preventive maintenance, and housekeeping measures; and through the implementation of emergency procedures.
2. A final rule on Presence Sensing Device Initiation (PSDI) of Mechanical Power Presses was published on March 14, 1988.
This amendment to the requirements for mechanical power presses permits (but does not require) PSDI on certain types of power presses.
Until this rulemaking, OSHA did not permit PSDI, but required that a mechanical power press operator physically initiate the stroke of the press by using hand controls or a foot pedal.
This revision allows a presence sensing device to initiate the stroke of the press automatically when the operator's body is out of the danger zone.
It is estimated that the removal of this prohibition, should industry choose to take advantage of it, could result in net savings totaling between $500 million and $600 million over the next decade.
3. On April 12, 1988, OSHA published a final rule addressing Safety Testing and Certification of Certain Workplace Equipment and Materials.
This final rule deleted the names of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL) and Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FMRC) from 23 testing-related standards provisions in 29 CFR Part 1910 (the OSHA General Industry Standards).
The standards being revised either had required or had implied that certain types of workplace equipment and materials could be third-party tested for safety only by UL and/or FMRC.
Such third-party testing is necessary in order that the equipment may be acceptable for workplace use under certain OSHA standards.)
4. OSHA issued a final rule to revise its standard on Concrete and Masonry Construction (formerly Concrete, Concrete Forms, and Shoring), located in Subpart Q of CFR Part 1926.
The final rule corrected problems related to the existing standards, including ambiguities, redundancies, and gaps in coverage.
Additionally, references to the American National Standard Institute's (ANSI) A10.9-1970, "Safety Requirements for Concrete and Masonry Work,"have been removed.
The applicable requirements from this ANSI standard and the more recent "American National Standard for Concrete and Masonry Work,"ANSI A10.9-1983, were used in developing this final rule.
5. OSHA issued a final rule on Crane or Derrick Suspended Personnel Platforms on August 2, 1988.
It revised a portion of the construction industry safety standards addressing cranes and derricks by adding a new paragraph regulating the hoisting of personnel.
The use of cranes or derricks to hoist personnel on a platform is occasionally necessary due to worksite conditions.
Several accidents had occurred, however, while using the practice.
While OSHA's construction standards did cover the use of elevators, personnel hoists, and serial lifts to hoist personnel, they did not provide guidance concerning safe work practices while hoisting personnel platforms with cranes or derricks.
This action corrected that lack of coverage.
1. On November 30, 1987, OSHA issued a proposed rule adding a section addressing Electrical Safety-Related Work Practices to the current Subpart S of 20 CFR Part 1910.
The proposal included requirements for work performed on or near exposed energized and deenergized parts of electrical equipment, use of electrical protective equipment, and the safe use of electrical equipment.
OSHA anticipates that compliance with these safe work practices will reduce the number of electrical accidents resulting from unsafe employee work practices.
Sources (Lockout/Tagout) was published on April 29, 1988.
This proposal addressed the lockout/tagout practices and procedures commonly used to disable equipment and to control the release of potentially hazardous energy while maintenance and service activities are being performed.
The standard would supplement and support the existing lockout and/or tagoutrelated provisions by providing comprehensive and uniform procedures for use with those provisions.
The proposal would apply to general industry employment under 29 CFR Part 1910, but would not cover maritime, agriculture, or construction employment.
It would also require training of employees in the use of these procedures and provide employers and employees with a set of mandatory rules and voluntary guidelines on which to base company lockout and/or tagout procedural efforts.
The proposal would not cover oil and gas well drilling; the generation, transmission and distribution of electrical power by utilities; or work on electrical conductors and equipment.
These will be the subjects of separate rulemaking efforts.
Additionally, the proposed standard would require that where no other standard specifies the use of a lock, a tag, or a combination of the two devices for a given situation, the employer must implement the proposed procedures and must select an appropriate and effective control measure based on the workplace hazards that are encountered.
OSHA expects that this proposal, if adopted, would prevent approximately 150 fatalities, 28,000 lost workdays, and 32,353 non-lost workday injuries a year in some 1.6 million establishments.
3. A proposed rule published on September 15, 1988, addressing Lift-Slab Construction operations, did two things.
It reopened the Concrete and Masonry Construction record to make available to the public new information and evidence related to lift-slab construction operations which was not available at the time OSHA was considering its revision to the Concrete and Masonry Construction Safety Standards; and it proposed new regulations for lift-slab operations.
Specific requirements for lift-slab operations were originally proposed for revision as part of the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) for Concrete and Masonry Construction which was published in the Federal Register on September 16, 1985 [50 FR 37543].
The purpose of this reproposal was to update the specific lift-slab requirements that had been incorporated by reference from the American National Standard for Concrete and Masonry Work, ANSI A10.9-1970.
In addition, OSHA proposed to promulgate and codify directly into the OSHA standards the appropriate ANSI requirements to protect the safety and health of workers engaged in lift-slab operations.
By this revision, OSHA eliminated any ambiguities caused by incorporating ANSI standards by reference.
This would also strengthen the lift-slab requirements by eliminating weaknesses or gaps in coverage that existed due to references to the outdated ANSI standard.
The following is a summary of the significant activities and accomplishments of the Directorate of Health Standards Programs for FY 88.
On December 4, 1987, OSHA published a revised standard on formaldehyde.
This standard lowered the permissible limit for worker exposure from three parts formaldehyde per million parts of air (3 ppm) to 1 ppm averaged over an 8-hour workday and established a short-term exposure limit (STEL) of 2 ppm during any 15-minute period.
The new standard also contained other protective measures including exposure monitoring, medical surveillance, emergency procedures, and hazard communcation.
It applies to all industries covered by the Occupational Safety and Health Act, including construction, maritime, and general industries.
1. On September 29, 1988, OSHA published a final standard on Access to Employee Exposure and Medical Records.
The revised standard allows employees, their representatives, and OSHA access to records of employee exposure and employee personal medical records.
This rule maintains essentially the same provisions as those promulgated on May 23, 1980, but incorporates changes to make the rule more cost-effective.
The changes exclude first-aid records of short-term employees from 30-year retention requirements; permit microfilm storage of all employee X-rays except chest X-rays; provide additional protection for trade secrets, according to the hazard communication standard; and require union representatives to show an occupational health need when seeking access to records without the consent of the employees.
2. On September 14, 1988, OSHA published an amendment to its 1986 Asbestos Standard in compliance with a decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
The amendment provides added protection for an estimated 35,800 workers primarily in the construction, manufacturing, and service industries.
3. In 1988, the Hazard Communication Standard (HCS) became effective in all nonmanufacturing industries except construction.
Promulgated in 1987, the expanded HCS requires employers to inform workers of the hazards of the chemicals they are exposed to, as well as the measures they can take to protect themselves.
This is to be accomplished through labels on containers, material safety data sheets, and training.
Coverage for the construction industry was in litigation in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in FY 88.
On August 8, 1988, OSHA published a proposal to modify the HCS.
The modifications address issues of feasibility and practicality in the non-manufacturing sector; they also clarify some of the rule's provisions.
Public comments were still being received at the end of the fiscal year.
4. As the result of a decision made by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia on April 6, 1988, OSHA published an amendment to its Ethylene Oxide Standard.
The existing standard, adopted in 1984, requires employers to limit exposure to one part ethylene oxide (EtO) per million parts of air (1 ppm) averaged over an 8-hour day.
The amendment establishes a short-term or excursion limit of five parts EtO per million parts of air (5ppm) averaged over a 15-minute sampling period.
The change provides added protection for approximately 68,000 workers employed primarily by hospitals and medical products manufacturers.
On June 7, 1988, OSHA published a proposal to amend the Air Contaminants Standard.
The revision would reduce or update permissible exposure limits (PELs) for chemicals already regulated by OSHA and would establish PELs for 205 substances that were not regulated by OSHA.
This action represented one of the most extensive rulemakings ever undertaken by OSHA.
This proposal would provide coverage for approximately 17 million workers potentially exposed to the air contaminants.
In FY 88, OSHA conducted a total of 57,894 inspections.
OSHA's newly organized Directorate of Compliance Programs coordinated 29 major enforcement cases involving significant proposed penalties which required the decision of the Assistant Secretary.
A major inspection of IBP, Inc., Sioux Falls, SD, resulting in proposed penalties of $3.1 million for serious ergonomic and other safety and health hazards to employees.
In March 1988, the agency issued an instruction requiring that a plant tour concentrating on high hazard areas be performed during the course of all general industry compliance inspections.
This new directive requires a walk-through at every facility regardless of the records of past performance.
During the walkthrough, the compliance officer will review the employer's overall safety and health management program and expand the scope of the inspections if there appear to be deficiencies in the program.
OŠHA continued its emphasis on the inspection of trenching and excavation sites, as well as hazardous waste sites.
OSHA also initiated a program, in conjunction with the University of Tennessee, to computerize its scheduling of construction worksites for regular programmed inspections.
This program was designed to ensure objectivity in programmed construction inspections, which currently account for about 40 percent of all Federal OSHA inspections, and to make better use of administrative and clerical resources.
The agency also undertook a major revision of its Field Operations Manual, the primary guide for all enforcement activities, to incorporate policy and procedural changes such as the enhancement of its records-check programs.
OSHA issued directives to its field staff which provided new or revised guidance on a number of significant compliance matters, including inspection procedures for the new grain handling facilities standard; updated guidelines for inspections dealing with the hazard communication standard and workplace exposure to blood-borne diseases such as AIDS; and issued permanent compliance guidelines for systems safety evaluations of operations with catastrophic potential.
Agency staff also completed the investigation of some 3,200 alleged discrimination cases, in fulfilling OSHA's responsiblities under Section 11(c) of the OSH Act and Section 405 of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act, to ensure that employees are not discharged or discriminated against for filing safety or health complaints.
In addition, the Directorate of Compliance Programs provided interpretations of OSHA standards and assistance on abatement methods to employers in construction, maritime employment, and general industry.
OSHA considers these efforts to have been successful and will seek to establish a new Presidential goal in early 1989.
This goal would call for a 2 percent per year reduction in the lost time case rate (number of lost time cases per 100 employees) for each of 3 years and would use FY 89 data as the basis for comparison.
OSHA duplicated and distributed a training package to the 41 agencies participating in the Federal Hazard Communication Program (FHCP) and made it available to the Federal Government at the lowest cost possible, through the National Audiovisual Center.
OSHA also worked with the General Services Administration (GSA) and the Department of Defense (DOD) to revise the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FARs) to assist government procurement agencies in complying with requirements of the standard regarding Material Safety Data Sheets.
OSHA provided assistance to Federal agencies in the areas of training, consultation, targeting, evaluation, enforcement and incentive programs.
OSHA also evaluated the safety and health programs of the Department of Transportation and the Department of Commerce, and conducted 1,600 inspections in Federal agencies.
More than 700 agency Federal safety and health managers, collateral duty safety and health officers, and union representatives attended the 42nd Annual Federal Safety and Health Conference in Chicago, Illinois, on October 5 to 7, 1988.
The conference provided a forum for presenting information and ideas to agencies in developing programs to help assure safety and health protection for Federal employees.
The Secretary of Labor also chartered two new Federal Safety and Health Councils (FSHC).
These councils are voluntary organizations chartered by the Secretary of Labor.
They are set up to bring the safety and health personnel of local Federal agencies together to encourage communications, the sharing of expertise, and mutual assistance on matters relating to occupational safety and health.
The councils chartered were the Northern Wisconsin FSHC and the Puerto Rico FSHC.
OSHA is designed to be a partnership between Federal and State governments.
Section 18 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 provides that a state or territory that wants to assume responsibility for development of occupational safety and health standards may submit for approval to OSHA a State plan for these standards and their enforcement.
At the end of the 1988 fiscal year, 25 states and territories administered their own OSHAapproved State plans.
Twenty states and two jurisdictions administered plans covering both private, and State and local government employment; two states, New York and Connecticut, covered only the public sector.
California covered only the public sector, pending resolution of the status of the plan.
During the fiscal year, OSHA officials attended three meetings held by State plan officials to assure the States' continued involvement in policy initiatives and other matters of a mutual interest.
Proposing to grant final approval to the State of Virginia, which would bring the total number of states with final approval to 14.
Granting final approval to the South Carolina State Plan in FY 88.
Final approval had been previously granted to Indiana in FY 86; to Arizona, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Tennessee, Utah, and Wyoming in FY 85; and to the Virgin Islands, Hawaii, and Alaska in FY 84.)
OSHA's judgment that, in actual operation, the State plan is "at least as effective"as the Federal program.
Maintaining concurrent Federal enforcement in California since July 1, 1987, in order to provide adequate occupational safety and health coverage for California's work force.
In 1987, the Governor of California notified the Department of Labor of his intention to eliminate funding for the California occupational safety and health program, and to withdraw the State plan. State private sector coverage was also suspended. Because of various court actions and a ballot initiative challenging the Governor's decision, the status of the plan remained uncertain at the end of the year.)
To ensure adequate protection for California workers and to assure an orderly continuance of safety and health protection on the job, OSHA established two new area offices in California bringing the state's total to seven.
These offices were staffed by more than 120 safety and health compliance officers.
Providing technical assistance to the Nevada State Plan in its investigation of the rocket fuel oxidizer explosion which occurred on May 4, 1988, at the Pacific engineering and Production Company of Henderson, Nevada.
Coordinating, with the General Accounting Office (GAO) and the Department's Office of the Inspector General (OIG), a review of various aspects of OSHA's State program activity during the fiscal year.
Completing the development of a "funding formula"to be used in distributing any additional State plan grant funds (in excess of cost-of-living increases) that become available.
A key OSHA goal was to improve communication and coordination with employers and employees to supplement enforcement efforts.
The Consultation Program was one way OSHA assisted employers in identifying and correcting hazards and in developing effective management systems for preventing workplace hazards.
Consultation services were provided primarily with Federal funds and at no cost to the employer.
There were 7(c)(1) Cooperative Agreements in 46 States and jurisdictions.
Eight States provided consultative services under their State plans.
Targeted mainly to smaller employers in more hazardous businesses, consultation may cover all or part of the workplace, depending upon the employer's request.
The service is administered by State agencies, including universities, as designated by the Governor of each State.
The service is penalty free, but employers are required to take immediate action to eliminate employee exposure to imminent dangers and to correct identified serious hazards within a reasonable time.
During FY 88, OSHA conducted more than 30,000 consultation visits.
Consultants continued to provide employers with safety and health program assistance and training upon request.
The program for "Inspection Exemption through Consultation"continued, with 329 exemption certificates issued.
These certificates were granted to small business employers who received a comprehensive consultation hazard survey, corrected all hazards identified, and demonstrated that an effective safety and health program was in operation.
During FY 88, the Consultation Program accomplished a major milestone in its implementation of a program-wide data management information system.
Forty-five of 46 State programs were able to get computer equipment on board and operational.
In addition, intensive computer-related training was completed by project managers and other key project staff.
Some of the consultation projects are now able to enter activity data and automatically generate written employer reports at the local level.
In its continuing effort to improve the cost-effectiveness and efficiency of the Consultation Program, OSHA placed a limit of 25 percent on all overhead costs (both direct and indirect administrative expenses) associated with the consultation program.
Moreover, to ensure maximum programmatic efficiency, OSHA strongly encouraged each consultation project to establish a goal of expending a minimum of 50 percent of its total funds, including funds for administrative costs, for consultant salaries and fringe benefits.
The majority of the States responded favorably to the target.
Consultants continued to support OSHA special emphasis programs in trenching and ergonomics.
Consultants provided special assistance to employers facing potential problems with issues such as the control of blood-borne diseases and the achievement of compliance with the hazard communication standard.
Assistance in developing effective safety and health management systems was emphasized in all consultation visits.
OSHA held the second consultation project managers' conference in as many years.
The theme of the conference, "Consultation: Meeting Our Objectives,"explored ways in which the consultation projects could best meet the eight principle objectives of the Consultation Program effectively and efficiently.
The Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) provides the opportunity for OSHA to expand its influence in the workplace across the country beyond those targeted for enforcement.
Through VPP, the agency continued to reach those companies that were fully committed to employee safety and health and that were incorporating those objectives in the daily operation of their workplaces.
The VPP consists of three separate programs.
The Star Program recognizes worksites that provide outstanding safety and health protection to their employees.
The Merit Program is a stepping stone to Star for worksites that are committed to providing the best worker protection and that are willing to work with OSHA as they improve their safety and health management.
The Demonstration Program encompasses those worksites that are attempting to provide Star-quality protection but have not yet attained the level of safety and health management required for Star or Merit participation.
There were 11 new approvals in FY 88.
In addition, one site, which had been a participant in the Merit Program, was approved and became a member of the Star Program.
Participants in the programs continued to avoid approximately 65 percent of the average lost-workday cases for their industries.
The VPPs were formally revised with a notice published in the Federal Register on July 12, 1988.
This revision specified OSHA's policy on referral for enforcement action, should that ever be necessary, and contained a variety of other clarifications including the name change of the Try Program to the Merit Program.
OSHA continued to promote the VPP.
A promotional kit was developed to assist in securing top management's interest in participation.
A logo was developed and new flags were designed.
A video stressing benefits to employees was developed to encourage employee interest at potential worksites.
The participants in the VPP formed an association to provide for the exchange of safety and health information and to promote the concept of the VPP.
Their fourth annual conference was held in Atlanta in September 1988.
Representatives of companies interested in applying to the VPP attended the conference to hear about the benefits of the VPP from companies already participating.
Participants in OSHA's Region VI formed a local chapter to further the goals of the organization.
The purpose of the proposal was to stimulate public participaton and to encourage and assist employers to use management methods to provide workplaces free of recognized hazards.
In FY 88, more than 7,000 Federal and State compliance officers, State consultants, safety and health representatives from other Federal agencies, and private sector personnel attended courses offered by the OSHA Training Institute at Des Plaines, IL.
The safety and health training presented by the Institute was designed to improve the skills and knowledge levels of persons engaged in work related to the OSH Act and to assist employers and employees in the recognition and elimination of occupational safety and health hazards.
The Institute offered 69 courses, of which 18 were conducted at sites away from the Institute where training could be enhanced by actual or simulated workplace conditions.
New courses included Introduction to OSHA for Non-Technical Personnel, Indoor Air Quality, Safety and Health in Shipyard Operations, and Longshoring and Marine Terminal Operations.
The Office of Training and Education developed and presented seminars to provide training to compliance officers and State consultants on grain handling operations and on OSHA policy regarding AIDS and other blood-borne diseases.
In addition, the Institute supported Regional Special Emphasis Programs by providing training on trenching and scaffolding operations.
The Office of Training and Education continued to support outreach efforts for private sector employers and employees.
A recertification program was initiated for instructors who are certified to issue OSHA-provided course completion cards.
These instructors are now required to attend either a construction or a voluntary compliance update course at least once every 3 years in order to maintain their certification.
In conjunction with the University of North Texas, the Office of Training and Education participated in a Project Minerva seminar designed to introduce safety and health principles to managers whose duties do not normally include occupational safety and health functions.
In addition, a Chicagoland Safety Day Seminar, sponsored by Region V, was held at the OSHA Training Institute and featured discussions of recent developments in OSHA.
In FY 88, OSHA awarded $2.1 million under the New Directions grant program to 34 nonprofit organizations providing a variety of occupational safety and health services.
The New Directions grant program provides funds to nonprofit organizations to develop the staff, skills, and services to become a competent, self-sufficient center for job safety and health.
Training and education projects that address serious problems in high hazard industries are supported by the grants.
Grantees may participate in the program for up to five years.
Seven New Directions grantees completed their programs in FY 88 and became competent, self-sufficient centers for workplace safety and health.
During FY 88, the OSHA Directorate of Policy and the Bureau of Labor Statistics began work on the first major revision of the OSHA Record-keeping regulations since the establishment of the agency.
The revision included a change in the forms maintained at the workplace and a new guideline on the data required to be kept by the employer.
As a precursor to this effort, OSHA conducted a special program of 200 coordinated records inspections in Massachusetts and Missouri.
These inspections were focused on the records maintained at the workplace, on the extent of information available, and on the accuracy with which those OSHA-required records were being maintained.
The Office of Regulatory Analysis, Directorate of Policy, is responsible under executive order and statutes for determining the economic impact of OSHA-proposed regulations on business enterprises.
A primary accomplishment was the development of an occupational safety and health-related data base on more than 400 OSHA-regulated chemicals.
The data base provides a new reference on these chemicals, their health effects, industrial uses, and related control technologies in all affected industrial sectors of the U.S. economy.
Using the information contained in this data base, OSHA designed and implemented a nationwide survey of more than 5,700 establishments to estimate worker exposure to substances grouped by work processes.
Collectively, these data were used to evaluate the impact of OSHA's proposed revision of permissible exposure limit's (PELs) for these substances.
This data base is maintained by the Directorate of Policy.
During FY 1988, the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) expanded its efforts to advance the Secretary's goals for the Department of Labor to achieve real improvements in the quality of the American workforce and workplace, the quality of the Department's own workforce and workplace, and the quality of the American manager.
In supporting the Secretary's goals and effectively carrying out its mission, ESA initiated or continued wide-ranging and futureoriented efforts to promote, support and direct the faithful enforcement and administration of the statutes, Executive Orders, and regulations for which the agency is responsible.
These things are done in a manner which promoted public confidence in and compliance with those laws, and in a working environment that recognized and developed the full potential, professionalism, and quality of worklife of its employees.
A Child Labor Advisory Committee was established to review and recommend changes to the labor standards regulations for employment of minors.
A final rule was published implementing various provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act which requires employers of special agricultural workers to record and report information to the Federal Government about the employment of these workers in seasonal agricultural services.
Timely response to complaints remained the cornerstone of the Wage and Hour Division's enforcement strategy during FY 1988.
The Division conducted 75,656 compliance actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), of which 58,105 were initiated as a result of complaints from workers or concerned citizens.
The inventory of complaints at the end of the year decreased from 22,320 (after FY 1987) to 20,377.
The FLSA enforcement program disclosed $30 million due 154,000 workers as a result of minimum wage violations, and $113 million due 324,000 employees as a result of overtime violations.
Employers agreed to pay $22 million in unpaid minimum wages to 138,000 workers and $86 million to 283,000 employees due overtime pay, for a total of $108 million.
The difference between the amount of back wages found due employees and the amount that employers agreed to pay reflects, for the most part, sums involved in pending litigation or the failure of certain employers to pay back wages in cases the Department deemed unsuitable for litigation.
The FLSA also permits individuals to bring private suits to collect back wages, liquidated damages, attorney's fees, and court costs.
The Department's enforcement statistics do not include the back wage amounts recovered in such private suits.
During fiscal 1988, the Division issued 26,128 certificates under section 14 of the FLSA, authorizing the employment of approximately 405,300 workers at less than the minimum wage.
Full-time students and workers with disabilities employed in rehabilitation facilities accounted, respectively, for 26 percent and 71 percent of the workers employed under certificates.
On October 16, 1986, the President signed legislation which amended section 14(c) of the FLSA pertaining to the Secretary's authority to issue certificates allowing employers to pay subminimum wages to disabled workers.
These amendments had the effect of streamlining the certification process and eliminating guaranteed wage rates specified by certificates, requiring only commensurate wages.
In addition, the amendments established a petition procedure for review of a disabled worker's wage rate by an Administrative Law Judge.
On July 20, 1988, the Department published a notice of proposed rulemaking, Regulations, 29 CFR Part 525, in the Federal Register implementing the 1986 amendments to section 14(c) of FLSA.
This notice provided for a 60-day public comment period which was subsequently reopened and extended for 15 days.
The Department will publish a final rule in fiscal 1989, following review and comments.
The Division found 20,454 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA during fiscal 1988, and it assessed $2.14 million in child labor civil money penalties against 902 employers who were found to be illegally employing 13,838 minors.
Section 11(d) of the FLSA authorizes the Secretary of Labor to regulate, restrict, or prohibit industrial homework as necessary to prevent evasion of the minimum wage requirements of the Act.
Exceptions to the ban have been permitted for individuals in certain hardship cases.
Homework has always been permitted under the FLSA in all other industries provided the employer maintains homeworker handbooks for such employees.
On November 5, 1984, the Department issued a final rule lifting the total ban on homework in the knitted outerwear industry.
Under this rule, employers of homeworkers in the knitted outerwear industry must first obtain a certificate from the Department authorizing such employment.
In August 1986, the Department published a further proposal which would have expanded the certification system in the knitted outerwear industry to the remaining restricted industries.
In March 1988, the Department published a new proposal which modified the certification system proposed in August 1986 by incorporating a number of provisions designed to improve and strengthen FLSA enforcement with respect to homeworkers, but retained the ban on homework in women's apparel (pending further review) and those jewelry manufacturing operations in the home that may be hazardous.
The Division's government contract enforcement program also concentrated on complaints alleging violations of the various laws that provide labor standards for employees performing government contract work.
During the 1988 fiscal year, 4,936 investigations were conducted under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the Service Contract Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Back wages found due 54,822 workers under the provisions of these laws totaled $39.4 million.
Employers agreed to pay $28.9 million of these back wage amounts to 45,921 workers.
Additional monies will be restored upon completion of administrative hearings or litigation action.
Under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, 13,249 prevailing wage determinations were issued during the fiscal year.
Of this total, 610 were general wage determinations which apply to many construction contracts in a given geographic area, and 12,639 were issued for specific construction projects.
A major improvement in Davis-Bacon wage survey operations was achieved with automation of survey management and data computation procedures.
This accomplishment should significantly increase wage survey capability, resulting in more timely and accurate Davis-Bacon wage determinations.
Also, work was completed on a Davis-Bacon pre-survey briefing package, designed to explain the survey process and promote higher survey response rates.
In addition, two training curricula were developed for the Division's wage determinations staff, covering Davis-Bacon survey techniques and statistical methods for wage determinations development.
The Wage and Hour Division issued 5,141 new or revised determinations of prevailing wages and fringe benefits under the Service Contract Act (SCA) for a wide variety of job classifications.
Wage determinations were issued for application to approximately 48,526 contracts.
The Blanket Wage Determination Pilot Test was expanded to include the participation of civilian agencies.
More intensive use of the 114 Blanket Wage Determinations developed thus far resulted in a sharp reduction in the average time required to process requests for SCA wage determinations from 57 days to under 40 days.
Also, a "Service Contract Wage Determinations Manual of Operations"was completed.
It is the first comprehensive description of the SCA wage determinations process targeted for both users and developers of SCA wage determinations.
Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA) During fiscal 1988, there were 11,690 farm labor contractor and farm labor contractor employee registrants under MSPA.
They employed approximately 396,835 crew members.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted 5,041 MSPA compliance actions during fiscal 1988, which resulted in civil money penalties totaling $705,235 assessed against violators.
In the fiscal year, 128 actions were initiated to deny farm labor contractors and farm labor contractor employees certificates of registration.
The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA) amended MSPA by deleting section 106 of MSPA, which prohibited the employment of illegal aliens by farm labor contractors.
Pursuant to IRCA, illegal alien employment is now within the purview of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) and is a violation of its provisions.
Sanctions are imposed by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS).
A number of investigations which evidenced possible criminal violations of statutes other than MSPA were referred to the Justice Department during the year.
The National Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committee and regional coordination committees, comprised of representatives of the regional and national offices of ESA, the Employment and Training Administration, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and the Office of the Solicitor, continued to coordinate programs and services that have an impact on migrant and seasonal agricultural workers.
The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), as amended by IRCA, requires employers to hire only legally authorized workers, to verify new employees as being legally authorized to work, and to retain records of this verification process.
IRCA also mandates that ESA assist the INS in determining compliance with these provisions.
ESA's Wage-Hour compliance officers have been inspecting employment eligibility verification documents (INS Forms I-9) since September 1987, for individuals hired after November 6, 1986, during the course of regularly scheduled on-site compliance activities.
During FY 1988, there were 36,612 establishments in which I-9 forms were inspected nationwide.
All inspection findings were reported by ESA to INS for that agency's determination as to compliance or noncompliance.
IRCA significantly revised the H-2 temporary non-immigrant agricultural worker program, administered by the ETA's U.S. Employment Service (USES), with a new H-2A program.
While the administration of the H-2A program remains the responsibility of USES/ETA, the Wage and Hour Division has responsibility for the enforcement of the contractual obligations of an employer of H-2A workers to such workers and other workers engaged in corresponding employment.
Since June 1, 1987, when Wage-Hour's enforcement functions under the H-2A program began, some 388 compliance actions have been completed.
Starting October 1, 1988, employers of "special agricultural workers" will be required to record and, starting in January 1989, report information about the employment of those workers engaged in seasonal agricultural services.
Their reports to the Federal Government include information about each of these "reportable workers,"including the crop and the number of workdays performed.
Each replenishment agricultural worker (RAW) is also entitled to receive a certificate from their employer regarding the number of work-days they were employed in seasonal agricultural services.
This certificate may be used by the worker in order to qualify for permanent residency status.
The requirements for employers of such workers are prescribed in Regulations 29 CFR, Part 502, issued pursuant to the INA, as amended by the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act, which was enacted June 27, 1988, prohibits most private employers from using lie detector tests either for pre-employment screening or during the course of employment.
Federal, State and local government employers are exempted from the Act.
The law provides several limited exemptions which permit the use of polygraph tests (but no other type of lie detector tests) under certain conditions.
The Wage and Hour Division has the responsibility to enforce the new law which will become effective December 27, 1988.
During fiscal 1988, ESA's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) continued its enforcement program to foster affirmative action and eliminate discrimination from the workplace of Federal contractors, and to obtain redress for victims of discrimination.
During the year, OFCCP completed 5,474 compliance reviews.
The reviewed contractors employed a total of 2,654,273 employees.
In addition, OFCCP continued to give priority to reducing the number of compliance reviews over one year old.
At the end of FY 1988, there were only 66 such reviews.
Complaint cases in inventory at the end of the fiscal year declined from 3,208 in FY 1980 to a current inventory level of 695 in FY 1988.
OFCCP conducted 1,165 investigations of discrimination complaints during fiscal 1988.
Where contractor noncompliance was found, OFCCP entered into 1,779 conciliation agreements and 1,908 letters of commitment.
OFCCP also recommended 123 enforcement actions which could result in removal of contractors from eligibility to compete for Federal contracts.
Additionally, the Solicitor of Labor filed formal administrative complaints against 31 Federal contractors.
No contractors were debarred during FY 1988.
OFCCP also negotiated a total of 602 agreements in which contractors committed $16,908,582 in financial outlays for lump sum or other cash payments, front pay, back pay, salary adjustments, accommodations, recruitment and training costs, etc.
Of this total, $8,690,087 in back pay awards went to 3,191 women, minorities, persons with handicaps and veterans.
Since 1982, OFCCP has taken positive steps toward effecting voluntary affirmative action among the Federal contractor community.
As a result, in FY 1988, 11,567 contractors were provided with 54,479 hours of voluntary technical assistance to better enable them to comply with OFCCP regulations.
In addition, 24 liaison groups were formed in FY 1988.
These groups continued to explore general compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
They contributed valuable input to OFCCP on ways to improve the compliance process and address aspects of affirmative action unique to their employment situations or industries.
OFCCP, in turn, provided advice, specific technical assistance and an exchange of information.
In 2,066 instances, OFCCP arranged linkage"agreements between employers and agencies providing worker training or referral services.
During FY 1988, OFCCP continued to seek improvements in the quality and timeliness of its compliance actions.
Decentralization to the regions of the Complaint Administration System (CAS).
Maintenance of tight controls and monitoring of cases in progress (case management).
This will assure more timely completion of compliance reviews and complaint investigations.
Streamlining of the enforcement process by eliminating unnecessary and burdensome procedural steps.
The new format will lead the Equal Opportunity Specialists through the compliance review, step by step and keep the review focused on any problem areas.
OFCCP's ultimate objective is to computerize this form.
Encouraging Government contractors to address the need to increase the availability of minorities and women through training in order to meet employment needs of new technologies as we approach the year 2000.
Development and implementation of additional guidance on proving and remedying systemic discrimination.
Revision of the Federal Contract Compliance Manual (the OFCCP procedures) and the program's Directives System to reflect current agency policy and to provide better guidance to compliance staff.
Refined and improved management information systems designed to improve the quality, integrity, and timeliness of data used in evaluating contractor performance, as well as the agency's own operational performance.
The Time Reporting Information System (TRIS) was phased in during FY 1988 in each of the regions.
TRIS was fully implemented and has become part of OFCCP's overall management information system.
In November 1987 a joint OFCCP/SOL Task Force was established to recommend means of improving coordination between the agencies.
One of the Task Force's conclusions was that joint consultation procedures would be of great benefit in improving the agencies'compliance and enforcement activities, including conciliation agreements and litigation.
During FY 1988, a Joint Review Committee (JRC) was established by the Regional Solicitors and OFCCP Assistant Regional Administrators in each of the ten DOL regions.
Development and delivery of a revised and comprehensive training program to address the needs of professional field staff for programmatic training.
The training should serve to increase quality and efficiency in the compliance review process and in the investigation of complaints, as well as computer skills of the compliance staff.
This training will also foster more uniform and consistent application of program policies.
In July 1988, OFCCP delivered the National Basic Training Conference for all field and National Office professional personnel.
A series of courses, known as the OFCCP Academy, is to be presented to staff beginning in March 1989.
Training was conducted during September through November 1987 for first-line supervisors.
Training will also be provided on the SCRR and in other areas such as interviewing and investigative techniques.
Refocusing program accomplishments away from completing paperwork to defining program effectiveness in terms of resolution of employment problems and remedies for protected groups.
ESA's Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) provided medical and rehabilitation services and prompt payment of wage loss benefits in the amount of $1.8 billion to nearly 400,000 beneficiaries under the Federal Employees'Compensation Act (FECA), Black Lung Benefits Act (BLBA), and Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act (LHWCA).
Having reached its goal of uniform timeliness of services to claimants and beneficiaries, OWCP turned its attention in FY 1988 to the responsiveness of its staff, the quality and efficiency of decisionmaking, and active efforts to restore injured workers to productivity through reemployment.
Procedures were streamlined to reduce the burden on claimants and their employing agencies, and to secure more staff time for case management and service to claimants.
By adopting new means of providing rehabilitation services to claimants in the Longshore and FECA programs, a record number of injured workers were reemployed.
Two major contracts to buy new ADP equipment were awarded under the FECA Data System Enhancement Project.
Much needed new equipment will be purchased for 13 FECA offices and for the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation System.
The Wage Hour Division and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance will be supported as well, eventually supplying a base system for all of ESA.)
OWCP continued its comprehensive program of debt management, using techniques authorized by the Debt Collection Act of 1982, for prompt debt resolution, and the reduction of outstanding receivables.
OWCP is forestalling the accumulation of new debt as well by stressing accurate benefit payments, case processing quality, and timeliness.
Management tools include debt identification through matching effort with the States and other Federal agencies, reporting delinquent debtors to credit bureaus and the use of a government-wide contract with private debt collection agencies.
The Division of Federal Employees' Compensation received 168,000 injury reports in FY 1988, compared to 155,000 in the previous year.
Despite this eight percent increase in incoming claims, DFEC maintained its inventory of unadjudicated claims at 12,000, or less than 30 days incoming.
Only 985 cases in the system had remained undecided more than 180 days at the end of the year.
DFEC far exceeded its goal for deciding claims in FY 1988.
Ninety-nine percent of traumatic cases were decided within 120 days and 94 percent of occupational disease cases within 10 months.
Eighty-two percent of wage loss claims were paid within 14 days of receipt, and 94 percent of medical bills were paid within 60 days.
The program paid $1.1 billion in benefits, including $238 million in medical and rehabilitation services and $905 million in wage loss and other compensation.
This seven percent increase over fiscal 1987 was partly due to a cost of living increase and a slightly larger number of persons receiving benefits.
While most improvements to the program's automated systems were deferred until new computer hardware was installed and tested, the program did make significant improvements to its automated system.
It began for the first time to capture medical diagnostic information by code, enabling a better analysis of its caseload and more sensitive intervention and case management.
Ten thousand claimants are receiving benefits by Electronic Fund Transfer, another new automated capability in response to a Department of Treasury initiative.
Automated access to medical payment history was placed in each district office.
Many medical bills can be paid more quickly without review of a case file, and many claimant and physician telephone calls can be answered as they are received without further delays.
To use its resources more efficiently and reduce the paperwork requirements on claimants whose injuries caused no lost time from work, as well as on agency personnel, DFEC reduced the processing requirements for uncontested no-lost-time injuries and greatly simplified the filing requirements for minor occupational diseases.
ESA Regional Administrators and OWCP Assistant Regional Administrators began extensive outreach efforts to Federal agency installations in their regions, through Safety and Health Councils, to improve agency compensation programs and enhance light duty and reemployment opportunities for FECA claimants.
Administration, Navy, HUD, Interior, Commerce, and NASA, in reemploying disabled employees and managing compensation costs.
National Office reviews of district office performance were redesigned to incorporate a statistically valid sampling technique and self-examination in the form of a modified version of the national review process is now required semiannually.
An intensive sampling process of the quality of work at every level is conducted by each local manager twice a year, except when a national office review is scheduled.
A record number of 1,142 disabled FECA claimants was restored to employment, either with their former agencies or with new employers.
As a result of the increased ability to provide rehabilitation benefits to claimants, which resulted from adoption of methods tested in a 1987 pilot project, rehabilitation services were provided to a total of 7,540 claimants, another record.
The average cost of the entire program per reemployed worker decreased slightly from each of the previous two years.
Three offices began to test the concept of providing early medical intervention, using trained medical personnel, to assist claims examiners in managing cases to an early return to work or early provision of rehabilitation services.
A second opinion program for claimants requesting authorizations for back and carpal tunnel surgery was implemented in all FECA district offices.
The Longshore program continued to improve its automated capacities, yielding better management of funds and tracking of cases.
Among the many significant improvements, automated computation of benefits was added to the program.
Special Fund were enrolled in Electronic Fund Transfer.
The improved automated system enabled Longshore to begin tracking new, more informative performance measurements, and to establish new standards for performance which provide a more comprehensive overview of program activities.
At the end of fiscal year 1988, these measurements showed the program to be generally operating at or above the desired levels of achievements.
Following a review and public comment period, the program prepared an Industry Notice which makes an important change in the standards for authorizing insurance carriers to write coverage under the LHWCA.
The Longshore program greatly intensified its efforts to monitor the reporting of cases with future obligations by selfinsured employers.
Under the LHWCA, self-insured employers are required to secure their future obligations by means of surety bonds or deposits of negotiable securities.
Administration of the District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Act of 1928 (DCCA) was transferred to the District of Columbia Government, by greement effective July 18, 1988.
The transfer of administration, which does not affect the statutory authority vested in DOL or OWCP, completed the transition begun in 1980 when the District established its own workers' compensation program for workers in private industry injured after 1982 in the District.
Approximately 630,000 medical bills were processed during the year and beneficiaries received over $602 million in benefits, including $118 million in medical benefits and $484 million in compensation.
Black Lung's procedures for authorizing special medical equipment were completely revised, enhancing the level of service provided to the beneficiary population and medical community.
The procedures refined requirements for approving medical equipment, pulmonary rehabilitation, and home nursing services for black lung beneficiaries.
Enhancements to the Black Lung program's automated system continued during the fiscal year, with the implementation of electronic fund transfers for nearly 200 major medical providers and the addition of identifying information to provide better internal controls for the program and improve automated matching activities with other agencies to identify beneficiaries and claimants improperly claiming dual benefits.
Black Lung program during the year received a first decision within 180 days.
Other areas of program performance continued to be high, reflecting a continuing commitment to effective service delivery.
Almost all of the program performance standards were met or exceeded.
A new performance standard measuring the timeliness of attorney fee processing was adopted and, as a result, 93 percent of the 1,143 attorney fee applications received by the program were processed within 30 days.
Because of aggressive debt management efforts, the Division collected $21.8 million from coal mine operators and their insurers to repay the Black Lung Trust Fund for interim benefits and interest.
This is the highest level of collections achieved since the transfer-of-liability provision of the 1981 Amendments to the Black Lung Benefits Act transferred approximately half of the industry's outstanding liabilities to the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
Combined excise tax receipts and reimbursements of $616.3 million from employers and insurers exceeded benefit expenditures by $14.3 million and thus were sufficient to cover more than onefourth of the cost of program administration as well.
The coal mine operators' collections, coupled with $14.9 million in writeoff and waiver actions on claimant debts, enabled the program to achieve a net reduction in the overall debt balance for the first time.
The program also developed additional automated information about claimant debt to assist in more timely and accurate determinations of debt status and recovery.
In December 1987, the U.S. Supreme Court handed down its decision in Mullins Coal Company, Inc. v. Director, OWCP, which stressed judicial deference to the agency's reasonable interpretation of its own regulations.
The decision reversed a prior decision of an appeals court concerning the proper interpretation of the interim presumption which governs the adjudication of black lung claims filed prior to April 1, 1980.
The Supreme Court held that the Department's interpretation that the presumption could only be invoked by the preponderance of "like kind" evidence was correct rather than invocation based upon a single qualifying piece of evidence.
As the principal staff support unit in ESA concerned with Congressional legislative activity, the Division of Legislature Analysis examined nearly 300 bills during FY 1988 to assess their impact on ESA-administered programs.
Agenda of Federal Regulations, and development of materials for several Departmental task forces.
The Division closely monitored legislation to expand ESA's program responsibilities or modify statutes enforced by the Agency.
Prior to the passage of the Employee Polygraph Protection Act (effective December 27, 1988) the Division analyzed that legislation in relation to its impact on ESA programs.
The Division also analyzed and reported on bills to increase the Federal minimum wage, reform the Davis-Bacon and Service Contract Acts, and remove restrictions on industrial homework.
Other Federal employment standards legislation tracked and analyzed by the Division included equal employment opportunity, child care, parental and medical leave, worker notification of plant closings or mass lay-offs, and drug testing.
In conjunction with responsibilities for providing staff support to Departmental task forces, the Division coordinated the review of ESA-administered laws and regulations to assess their impact on work and the family for the Secretary's task force on child care.
The Division also coordinated the preparation of materials for Departmental task forces on enforcement and on older workers.
The Division of State Employment Standards Programs furnished expertise on State labor standards laws and programs that impact on or are affected by ESA programs or which relate to emerging issues.
One of the most active areas was minimum wage legislation.
The frequency of legislative activity to increase State minimum wages necessitated continuous monitoring and updating of State minimum wage rate information.
In conjunction with the consideration of proposed Federal legislation or rulemaking, or for the use of DOL task forces, the Division developed and provided information on State legislation concerning numerous other subjects, including industrial homework, polygraph testing, parental and medical leave, child care, equal employment opportunity, and plant closing notification.
The Division served as catalyst and facilitator in the promotion and consideration of proposed ESA/State cooperative efforts and agreements involving the administration of programs which are similar at Federal and State levels.
The Division provided technical advisory assistance and information on numerous labor standards subjects in response to almost 2,000 requests from State labor departments and legislatures, management organizations, multi-State employers, organized labor, other Federal agencies, the Congress and others.
Throughout the year, the Division maintained active working relationships with State labor officials and their organizations, and participated in several regional and national conferences of State officials.
In serving as a national clearinghouse of information on State legislative developments, the Division reviewed and analyzed approximately 1,200 labor bills and new laws and prepared for publication annual and biennial articles on State trends in these areas.
Throughout the past year, the Division of State Workers' Compensation Programs worked closely with State workers' compensation administrators in facilitating improvements in their statutes and programs.
The Division also served as a highly respected source of information for State legislative study committee and commission deliberations and participated in State, regional, and national conferences, providing expertise on national trends and issues in workers'compensation.
The Division provided expert technical assistance and information to workers' compensation officials, employers, insurers, organized labor and others through periodic reports on significant legislative enactments, informational charts and tables, and publications dealing with skyrocketing medical costs, disputed case logjams, State fund deficits, and health and safety issues.
As the principal national clearinghouse for information of State workers' compensation legislative developments, the Division analyzed and prepared digests of 152 enacted amendments from over 1,000 proposed amendments that it monitored during Fiscal Year 1988.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration saw record decreases in mine fatalities in both and coal and noncoal mining industries during fiscal year 1988.
Coal mine fatalities numbered 54 in fiscal year 1988, decreasing from a previous year record-low of 60 fatalities in FY 1987.
In noncoal or metal and nonmetal mining, there were 49 fatalities this year compared with 64 in FY 1987.
MSHA became part of the focus of the nation and world early in FY 1988 as agency inspectors directed the rescue of Jessica McClure, a Midland, TX, baby who had fallen into an abandoned well and was trapped for two days.
Later, President Reagan officially paid tribute to the MSHA personnel who directed the successful rescue operation.
During fiscal year 1988, special efforts were made to ensure accurate reporting of accidents and injuries by mine operators to MSHA under authority of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977.
The coal division implemented a new policy and procedure for conducting audits of accident reporting by operators.
The metal and nonmetal division doubled the number of operator reporting audits during the year compared with the previous total.
Coal Mine Safety and Health graduated 20 new supervisors from its second Supervisory/Managerial Development Program.
A formal evaluation of the program resulted in revisions to increase its effectiveness and efficiency.
As part of an ongoing effort to assure the integrity and control of the coal division's programs, a review of several district and field office's management accountability responses was conducted.
A number of technical developments in fiscal year 1988 involved the revision of existing safety standards and establishment of new standards for metal and nonmetal mines, including revised classification of gassy and nongassy mines.
These developments incorporated advances in mining technology and addressed specific injury trends.
Significant contributions were made in improving mine roof control through increased industry adoption of Automated Temporary Roof Supports (ATRS).
Roof fall fatalities reached an historic low of 11 during fiscal year 1988.
MSHA assisted efforts by the Bureau of Mines to develop a person-wearable, lighter-weight, self-contained self-rescue device (SCSR)—a breathing apparatus which provides oxygen to miners to protect them from poisonous gases in the event of a fire.
At the close of the year, pre-test information on the lighter SCSR was submitted to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) for approval which was expected in the first quarter of FY 1989.
The agency continued to review major groups of mine safety and health regulations to improve the safety and health of miners, updating existing regulations, and eliminating unnecessary provisions.
In achieving these goals, MSHA provided compliance alternatives and established provisions which accommodated advances in technology resulting in safer, more healthful mines.
There were 2,153 underground coal mines and 2,930 surface mines and facilities under the jurisdiction of the Coal Mine Safety and Health (CMS&H) Division during fiscal year 1988.
Coal conducted 57,586 inspections and investigations and carried out 5,698 education and training activities at surface mines and facilities.
The Division also issued 118,503 citations and withdrawal orders to coal mine operators and independent contractors for violations of safety and health regulations.
Supervisory officials held 1,584 health and safety conferences to discuss inspectors'’ findings at the request of operators and labor representatives.
Coal mine inspectors, technical specialists, education and training specialists, and supervisors operated from 10 district offices, 17 subdistrict offices, and 74 field locations.
At the end of the fiscal year, the coal mine safety and health inspection force numbered 799.
During fiscal year 1988 CMS&H implemented a program that redefined its field education and training program.
Major emphasis was placed on ensuring that all miners received the training specified in Part 48, Title 30, Code of Federal Regulations, and that quality training was received.
MSHA's education and training specialists evaluated the quality of training plans and programs and assisted mine operators and cooperative trainers in making the necessary revisions.
Coal mining fatalities reached an all-time fiscal year low of 54 in 1988, down from the previous record low figure of 60 for fiscal year 1987.
The fatal incidence rate for FY 1988 was .04 deaths per 200,000 employee hours compared to .04 in FY 1987.
The incidence rate for all types of injuries in coal mining increased from 9.19 in FY 1987 to 10.79 in FY 1988.
The number of coal mining employees (excluding office workers) was 170,694 at the end of FY 1988 as compared to 166,935 in FY 1987.
MSHA investigated 211 complaints of safety- or health-related discrimination that coal mine employees filed with the agency during the fiscal year.
Thirty-four investigations were opened into possible knowing and willful violations of coal mine safety and health regulations.
In addition the agency modified its procedures for conducting both types of investigations and provided training for all personnel involved in the delivery of the program.
Coal Mine Safety and Health specialists also implemented a new policy and procedure for the conduct of audits of accident reporting by mine operators under the authority of Section 103 of the Act and Part 50 of the regulations.
Auditors began planning a comprehensive review that included examination of information maintained by mine operators and verification from other data sources of worker accidents, injuries, and illnesses.
Coal Mine Safety and Health graduated 20 new supervisors from its second Supervisor/Managerial Development Program.
At the conclusion of the program a formal evaluation resulted in a restructuring of the subjects taught.
Modifications were made in the interview and selection process and to the student-mentor process.
Steps were taken to start a third program early in FY 1989.
The Division continued to monitor coal miner participation in the Part 90 program, which seeks to prevent progression of lung disease by allowing affected miners to work in areas of a mine having relatively low coal dust levels.
The program declined in miner participation from a peak level of 550 Part 90 miners in FY 1981, to an average of about 135 “available"Part 90 miners in FY 1988.
MSHA continued to work with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health on a project to define the major reasons for the decline and seek an effective solution.
Production of two MSHA manuals were completed during the fiscal year.
One, entitled Administrative Policy and Procedures Manual, contains six volumes that detail MSHA's organization, administration and management policies and procedures.
The other, Program Policy Manual, consists of five volumes compiling the agency's policies on implementation and enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 and Title 30 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
In addition, this work generated a third manual which will detail procedures for MSHA personnel to follow while conducting various inspection activities, completing required inspection reports and forms, and the proper use and care of the various types of inspection equipment and facilities.
Investigation Handbook were completed and were to be distributed during fiscal year 1989.
A special committee was established to review the ventilation and dust control problems on longwall-type mining sections to help mine operators achieve consistent compliance with the applicable respirable dust standard.
This is a planned long-term effort.
During FY 1989 the program focused on compiling a longwall dust control handbook for use by mine operators in applying available dust control technology to achieve and maintain compliance with MSHA's dust standards.
In the ongoing effort to assure the integrity and control of CMS&H programs, reviews of five of the Division's district offices were conducted to determine how they were responding to the agency's management accountability initiatives.
Field reviews of two CMS&H districts also were conducted during the fiscal year.
The computerization of the Noise Program in FY 1987 enabled MSHA to identify mining occupations and types of equipment that have a potential to produce high noise levels.
This permitted MSHA to begin work with mine operators and equipment manufacturers to reduce the noise to more acceptable levels.
CMS&H assisted in developing an industrial hygiene program that resulted in computerization of the most common chemicals found in the mining environment.
This allowed MSHA district officials to use the information to assure that Material Safety Data Sheets were available on mine property for all toxic chemicals.
This program assisted inspectors in making health hazard evaluations of chemicals found in coal mine operations.
MSHA conducted a survey of all longwall mining sections and related developmental panels.
The data collected was incorporated into a database where it was evaluated for compliance with the agency's Longwall Task Force recommendations.
Findings of the study were distributed to the field.
These procedures addressed plan tracking, control, evaluation and overall management of the process.
MSHA established a committee with representatives of the Office of the Inspector General (OIG), the National Council of Field Labor Locals (NCFLL), and MSHA to develop an inspection note pad for use in documenting inspection activities.
The note pads provide a comprehensive record that required elements of mandatory inspections have been completed.
The committee also addressed specific requirements for inspection report files in the future.
MSHA's Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health Division promoted safety and health at about 400 underground mines and more than 11,000 surface mines, quarries, sand and gravel operations, and mineral mills during fiscal year 1988.
These operations produce a wide range of mineral materials, including gold, silver, lead, zinc, copper, iron, uranium, potash, limestone and sand and gravel.
In October 1987, metal and nonmetal division personnel directed the rescue operations of 18-month-old Jessica McClure, of Midland, TX, who was trapped in a well for nearly two days.
Two MSHA inspectors from the agency's Carlsbad, NM, office were called and flown to Midland to assist in the up-until-then futile rescue attempts.
Later, another MSHA employee joined them.
The MSHA team encountered a chaotic rescue site cluttered with banks of television cameras, radio microphones, news reporters as well as those making rescue attempts.
The local police chief put the MSHA inspectors in charge of the 24-hour-long daily operations, which resulted in the successful rescue of Jessica—an event which captured the attention of this nation and of the world.
In a subsequent ceremony at the Labor Department's headquarters, President Reagan paid tribute to the three MSHA employees who worked around the clock to free the little girl.
Recently,"said the President at that time, "the country was riveted to the story of Jessica McClure, and I think that we all said prayers of thanks that the story had a happy ending. I think we're all thankful in our hearts for the generous people who worked around the clock, through fatigue, past exhaustion, to save little Jessica."
As of the end of fiscal year 1988, metal and nonmetal mine inspectors operated from six districts, six subdistricts, 49 field offices, and five field stations throughout the nation.
With a workforce of 545 employees, including 358 inspectors and investigators.
Six subdistricts have been scheduled for elimination in FY 1989 as part of the reorganization plan initiated in mid-1986.
There were 12 subdistricts prior to the initiation of the reorganization plan.
During the fiscal year, 18,090 complete regular inspections were conducted at producing metal and nonmetal mines and mills.
An additional 801 regular inspections were conducted at mines and mills that were not actively producing, i.e., operations with crews performing only maintenance work.
Overall, 98 percent of mandated inspections were completed at metal and nonmetal mines.
Enforcement personnel also conducted 273 inspections or investigations in response to hazard complaints by miners or their representatives.
A total of 794 miscellaneous inspections were made of methane concentrations at gassy mines, electrical installations, hoist equipment, and shaft sinking operations.
According to preliminary data, a new record low of 49 fatalities occurred in metal and nonmetal mines and mills during FY 1988, compared with 64 fatalities in FY 1987 and the previous record low of 50 deaths in FY 1986.
A total of 260 accident investigations were conducted during the fiscal year, including investigations of all fatal accidents, compared with 245 accident investigations conducted during FY 1987.
Special emphasis was placed on Part 50 audits to check the operator compliance with employment and injury reporting requirements during FY 1988.
A total of 849 audits were conducted during the year, compared to 390 audits during FY 1987.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors issued 44,897 compliance orders and citations for violations of safety and health standards and regulations during FY 1988.
This was a 23.3 percent increase over the 36,425 orders and citations issued in FY 1987.
As a result, compliance follow-up inspections to check correction of previously cited violations increased to 7,711 during the fiscal year, compared to 6,303 in FY 1987.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors and training specialists engaged in 332 onsite education and training assistance evaluation activities during the fiscal year.
During the fiscal year, there was a significant increase in special investigations activities.
Under provisions of Section 105(c) of the Act, 100 cases were filed by miners alleging acts of discrimination, and special investigations were made on 91 cases.
Under the provisions of Section 110 of the Act, 232 cases of possible knowing and willful violations were initiated for investigation and 135 investigations were completed.
Two special emphasis programs were continued in FY 1988—the Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) and the Compliance Assistance Visit (CAV) Program.
The PAR program targeted 25 mines and mills which had incurred the largest number of injuries above the national average for similar operations in the previous year.
As in the past, these operations received additional assistance in training and safety procedures.
Under this program, citations are not issued during the visits, but operators are issued notices of any noncompliance with standards and regulations.
On the next regular inspection, inspectors check to make sure that any conditions noted during the CAV have been corrected.
Inspectors and specialists also made 2,921 visits to mines and mills for other types of compliance assistance activities during the fiscal year.
A number of technical developments took place in FY 1988, which involved the revision of existing standards and establishment of new standards for metal and nonmetal mines.
New standards on underground gassy metal and nonmetal mines became effective on October 29, 1987.
Under the previous classification, a mine was either gassy or nongassy and was considered gassy if one or more criteria were met.
Every mine that was classified had to comply with identical safety standards.
Under the new classification, gassy mines are divided into six categories based on the type and frequency of methane occurrence, the mining method, the combustibility of the ore being mined, the geology of the ore body being mined or the surrounding strata, and other related factors.
The new standards are unique to each category of mines and are considered to be more effective in protecting the safety of miners in the least burdensome manner.
Developments in the health area included the revision of existing standards for ionizing radiation for underground metal and nonmetal mines and the establishment of proposed rules for air quality, chemical substances, and respiratory protection standards.
The final rules on radiation standards, transmitted to OMB for review, improved protection of underground miners with standards that reflected developments in the principles of radiation protection.
The proposed rules for air quality and chemical substances, which were also transmitted to OMB for review and would also be applicable to coal mines, revised existing standards and included permissible exposure limits for new substances which could pose health hazards to miners.
In addition, the proposed rules included revised requirements for exposure monitoring, carcinogens, and respiratory protection programs.
MSHA also developed hazard communication standards to reduce the incidence of chemically-related illnesses and injuries in the mining industry.
In early March of FY 1988, a letter was sent to more than 26,000 mine operators and other addressees for suggestions and recommendations for potential revision of MSHA Program Circular PC-7014, "Report on 30 CFR Part 50.
The publication presented information on the procedures for reporting accidents and other events to MSHA and was widely circulated throughout the mining industry.
An all-MSHA committee reviewed and studied all comments received.
While most comments favored rulemaking to change 30 CFR 50, the committee recommended an addendum sheet be published.
The addendum was published and distributed near the end of fiscal year 1988.
In October 1987, a decision was made to conduct all noncoal dust sample weighings at the Denver Health and Safety Technology Center.
A program to develop, purchase, and install a robotic weighing laboratory was undertaken.
In the interim, a manual weighing laboratory was placed in operation, utilizing temporary employees.
By the end of the fiscal year, the manual laboratory had made over 20,000 weighings.
Also, by the end of the fiscal year, the robotic system had been designed, purchased, and installed, and experimental samples were processed to test the robotic system.
In was anticipated that the robotic laboratory would be in operation by January 1989.
A system of collecting fees for safety testing, evaluation and approval of mining products and other similar actions was developed and implemented early in fiscal year 1988.
It allowed MSHA to have accurate accounting information to conform to the new provisions of Part 5 of Title 30.
The implementation of the new fee system was accomplished without any procedural faults and without user complaints.
The Technical Support Approval and Certification Center processed 2,732 approvals during the year, and the inventory of pending cases was reduced by six percent at the end of the year compared with the end of FY 1987.
Approval processing time was reduced by about 50 percent as a result of concentrated efforts to streamline processing procedures, improve record keeping of time expenditures and monitor approval processing.
Assistance was provided the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) in the on-site investigation of the rocket fuel plant explosion in Henderson, NV.
The explosion destroyed one of two plants in the nation that produces rocket fuel for the space shuttle and some military rockets.
An in-depth technical report of MSHA's findings was prepared.
Technical Support personnel responded to four mine emergencies, including three underground mine fires and one underground mine explosion.
Technical assistance also was provided following an underground mine fire.
Significant contributions were made toward improving mine roof control safety through the advance of Automated Temporary Roof Supports (ATRS) for use in lieu of canopy as temporary roof support; through testing and evaluation of new and existing roof support systems; through mine design by evaluation of stress induced by the design system, and through the evaluation of auger mine roof support systems.