The U.S. Department of Labor reorganized and strengthened its services in 1969 to improve the conditions of employment for some 85 million working Americans and to widen the avenues of opportunity for the jobless and the disadvantaged.
Organizational changes within the Department and its agencies were dictated largely by the economic need to fight inflation without significantly adding to our unemployment rolls and the human need to give our disadvantaged citizens their chance for decent, rewarding jobs.
As Secretary, I take pride in the accomplishments already recorded by the Labor Department's more than 10,000 employees.
I am confident that, with their skills and dedication, the new directions we have charted will provide still greater service to all our people in the years ahead.
As it has since its creation in 1913, the Department this year continued its efforts to improve the quality of the workplace, the labor market, and the bargaining table.
At the same time, the Department pressed forward with programs born in the 1960's to provide training and opportunity for those who had been left behind in the surge of national prosperity.
But the 1969 fiscal year also brought new approaches and new ideas for service to both working and jobless Americans.
Top priority was given to the improvement of departmental programs and structures.
One of the more significant achievements was the reorganization in March of the Manpower Administration.
Certain functions were combined and overlapping responsibilities were eliminated.
A single, direct line of authority was established from the Manpower Administrator in Washington to the eight regional offices and to the Manpower Administrator for the District of Columbia.
Related employment and training activities that had been conducted by two separate agencies were combined into the U.S. Employment and Training Service.
The Office of Assistant Secretary for Manpower was separated from the Office of the Manpower Administrator, and management effectiveness increased significantly as the former took responsibility for policy formulation and the latter for daily manpower operations.
These changes already have improved management and communications in the manpower operation.
More importantly, they have made it possible to provide jobseekers with faster, more efficient, and more economical help.
Further steps were needed to strengthen the local services of all departmental field offices.
President Nixon cleared the way for a major effort in this area by establishing uniform regional boundaries and regional office locations for five governmental agencies, including the Labor Department, which administer related social programs designed especially for the disadvantaged.
The President also called on the heads of 10 agencies, again including the Labor Department, to reexamine existing relationships between their national headquarters and their field offices, to find ways of eliminating red tape, decentralizing the decisionmaking process as much as possible, and developing stronger administrative structures and practices.
The Department established a policy for delegating to the field and regional offices as much decisionmaking and action taking as feasible.
The Department's field personnel are now in far better position to put their local knowledge to use, to tailor our programs to the specific needs of the people in their areas.
In another major reorganization, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC), which is responsible for assuring equal employment opportunity in federally assisted contract work, was placed within the Department's Wage and Labor Standards Administration.
OFCC is now able to take full advantage of the organizational resources—manpower, information, and experience—that the Wage and Labor Standards Administration has developed over the years through its continuing programs and its investigations of job discrimination.
The organizational changes I have cited were aimed at improving the Department's immediate ability to serve the employed and the jobless.
To insure that the Department's future activities will be well coordinated, well planned, and properly focused, the Office of Policy Planning and Research was elevated to higher status and placed under an Assistant Secretary.
This unit will provide the Department with a broad range of planning, research and evaluation efforts, policy guidance, and program development.
It will recommend where the Department should be going and develop vehicles to take us there.
The objective of these changes was the development of a greater professionalism, a greater management expertise, with which the Department of Labor can provide the most competent and effective service to the citizens of this country.
As they have since the early 1960's, the needs of the disadvantaged received high priority from the Labor Department this year.
To provide the best job training and placement aid that could be devised, we not only reorganized the Manpower Administration but also reviewed our manpower programs to make sure they were working at optimum effectiveness.
We found this study vital as we prepared for the transfer of the Job Corps from the Office of Economic Opportunity to the Labor Department.
Careful evaluation of the Job Corps' performance since its inception in 1964 showed the clear need for a systematic overhaul.
Those Centers which had proven most effective in preparing disadvantaged young men and women for jobs or further training were retained.
Those with unsuccessful records were closed, and the young people affected were transferred to other youth programs where they could receive the assistance they needed.
Plans were then made to open new Centers in or near urban areas with large numbers of disadvantaged youth.
Unlike the earlier Centers, which had been located primarily in rural areas, the new Centers will be able to provide Corpsmen with the full range of employment and training services that are available in urban areas through government and private organizations.
The new Centers will aim at performing all the operations of recruitment, training, and placement within the disadvantaged youngsters' own State or urban area, thus reducing earlier problems of homesickness and other emotional difficulties.
While these changes will be beneficial, still more must be done to transform fragmented manpower programs into a total system through which every disadvantaged person can receive the attention and help he needs.
We have now nearly proposed legislation to replace the existing patchwork of manpower programs with a comprehensive system jointly administered by Federal, State, and local governments.
This program would enable State and local officials to use national manpower funds to develop programs individually tailored to the needs of their areas.
The year just ended also saw the Labor Department apply technology—once considered a major cause of unemployment—to the task of solving unemployment.
Computerized job banks, patterned after a year-old pilot program in Baltimore, were set up on a limited scale in New York City, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Sacramento.
The job banks use computers to produce daily lists of available jobs, which enable interviewers to match jobseekers with jobs in a matter of hours, instead of days as had been customary in the past.
We expect to have job banks operational in many major cities during the 1970 fiscal year.
We also developed a program, slated to begin in fiscal 1970, to place disadvantaged workers in career jobs in Federal, State, and local government, as well as in private, nonprofit public service agencies.
This Public Service Careers program will test the capacity of the public sector to hire the disadvantaged and help them up the career ladder.
Recognizing that government alone cannot undertake the responsibility for training and hiring the unemployed, the Labor Department this year continued to encourage private employers to participate in the Job Opportunities in the Business Sector (JOBS) program, a joint effort by the National Alliance of Businessmen and the Department to hire and train by June 1971 over 600,000 disadvantaged, jobless persons in 131 of the Nation's largest cities.
JOBS, whose first contract was signed just before the start of the 1969 fiscal year, enrolled over 58,000 men and women in its first year of operation.
The Department also sought new solutions to the problem of job discrimination.
Strengthened by its reassignment to the Wage and Labor Standards Administration, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance introduced a new concept for substantially increasing minority group employment in the higher paying trades engaged in federally assisted construction.
The new concept, pioneered in the Philadelphia area, involves government establishment of acceptable ranges for minority group employment in certain traditionally white trades.
These ranges are set by OFCC after thorough study of the area in which the federally assisted construction will take place, the number of minority group members working in the construction trades there, and the number available for such employment.
Job safety is also a concern of the Department, and we intensified our efforts in 1969 to help reduce the toll of human suffering and economic waste that results from job-related illness and accidents.
After public hearings and study by a newly established National Safety Advisory Committee, stricter health and safety standards for workers covered by the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act were promulgated in May 1969.
The revisions were the first to take effect since 1960.
They include an occupational noise limit—the first ever established under Federal law—and limits for exposure to toxic dusts, including—another Federal first—coal dust.
Department officials also testified in 1969 on the need for improved health and safety standards in certain industries, including coal mining and construction.
They urged, however, that the protection of Federal law be extended to workers in all occupations, through a comprehensive occupational health and safety act.
A bill has been proposed by the Department.
Its enactment would significantly reduce the number and severity of job-related accidents that occur in the United States each year.
The Department also continued its efforts to assure workingmen and women the wages to which they are entitled.
Investigations conducted by the Wage-Hour Division in fiscal 1969 uncovered cases in which nearly a half-million workers had been underpaid a total of some $89 million in violations of the Fair Labor Standards Act and other laws administered by the Department—most of them low-income workers most desperately in need of their pay.
Just as workers need a livable income while they are working, so do they need adequate financial protection to tide them over in times of temporary unemployment.
Yet, in fiscal 1969, our nation's unemployment insurance program was inadequate.
Accordingly, we are working on a draft bill, nearly completed by the end of the year, to strengthen and modernize this program.
The bill calls for extension of coverage to some 5.5 million workers who are now unprotected.
It would encourage States to raise their benefit levels, and enable workers in all States to receive unemployment benefits while they are enrolled in training programs to increase their employability.
The Department's proposal also contains a built-in "trigger" which would automatically extend the length of time benefits are paid in all States when the national unemployment rate for insured workers reaches 4½ percent for 3 consecutive months.
This would help protect the Nation's workers, without any delay, if the economy should falter.
Labor-management relations also were a major concern of the Department.
Departing from a recent trend, we embarked in the second half of the fiscal year on a policy of minimum intervention in collective bargaining disputes.
In a society that embraces the concept of free collective bargaining, the parties engaged in a dispute are properly responsible for settling their differences.
We believe that bargaining will proceed more responsibly when conducted free of the shadow of government intervention.
This new policy of disengagement was demonstrated successfully in the final weeks of the longshore dispute, in the Railroad Signalmen's dispute, and in the Pan American World Airways case.
In other labor-management areas, the Department testified in May in favor of legislation to extend the collective bargaining protection of the National Labor Relations Act to farmworkers.
As members of the first national administration to support this measure, Department officials believe there is no human or economic justification for excluding farmworkers from these protections.
At the same time, we recognize that agriculture faces unique problems.
We therefore recommend creation of a special board to deal with the problems of strikes during the harvest season and other difficulties peculiar to agriculture.
We also testified this year in favor of legislation to legalize common situs picketing on construction sites, provided that appropriate safeguards are established to protect the public interest.
While the Labor Department's prime responsibilities are toward American citizens, we also participate in international labor activities.
Feeling that the Department's knowledge and experience in such fields as manpower, labor-management relations, and union development can be highly beneficial to other countries, we continued this year to provide technical assistance to developing countries.
In addition, we continued work on a number of major issues in the international trade policy field, arranged training and cultural exchange programs, and participated in the work of international organizations.
And it was my special pleasure this year to address the International Labor Organization at its 50th anniversary meeting in Geneva, Switzerland.
One of the most productive international institutions of all times, the International Labor Organization is an outstanding example of world progress through social and economic justice.
The activities described thus far—whether within the Department, outside the country, or on behalf of working or disadvantaged Americans—were all aimed at solving specific problems or insuring specific progress.
But during fiscal 1969, the Labor Department also gave very close attention to a general problem—one that affected virtually all of our activities.
That was the problem of mounting inflation, which robs the purses of both the working and the disadvantaged, the very people we seek to help.
Furthermore, a drastic move to curtail inflation could result in an unacceptably high rate of unemployment.
This would wipe out our recent gains in training and placing the disadvantaged, and in assuring equal employment opportunity.
Sharing President Nixon's belief that a strong governmental fiscal and monetary policy is the best means of combating inflation, the Labor Department studied carefully the way in which our manpower programs might help ease the task of checking inflation without an appreciable rise in unemployment.
By focusing on the disadvantaged, these programs concentrate on specific groups whose unemployment rates are the highest.
By making available workers not otherwise employable, they help to improve the relationship between labor supply and demand in markets related to particular goods and services.
By improving the functioning of the job market, they cut the time between loss of a job and the acquisition of a new job.
For these reasons, we believe that the Department's manpower programs play a major role in keeping unemployment at low levels as the President's fiscal and monetary policies take hold and gradually reduce the rate of inflation.
We also reminded both labor and business that the current inflationary situation is not permanent.
We emphasized that both must remember that the kind of wage settlements that may seem appropriate now may not be suitable as inflation recedes.
We therefore asked that those parties negotiating 2- and 3-year contracts look ahead, and tailor their settlements with a future, more stable economic situation in mind.
These, then, were the major activities of the Department of Labor in fiscal 1969.
Many of them had immediate effect, raising income levels for those illegally underpaid, providing better job training and work experience to nearly a million jobless and underemployed, improving safety and health conditions for workers on Federal contract jobs.
But the greatest impact of our efforts will be felt in the future.
The Labor Department's proposed budget for fiscal 1970 provides an alltime high of more than a million training opportunities for those who need them most.
The citizens who take advantage of these opportunities—and of the opportunities that will open during the 1970's—will enjoy the benefits of our improved manpower system.
Minority group workers who cannot find employment in skilled construction trades will feel the impact of our new equal employment opportunity thrust.
Farmworkers, other workers not now covered by unemployment insurance, and workers who now suffer needless job safety and health hazards will—hopefully—become the beneficiaries of this year's legislative planning.
In short, those activities which will have greatest impact on the future well-being of the Nation are ones in which the Labor Department sought to improve its capacity for national service.
And we in the Department believe that those activities were the year's most important.
As a practical matter, and as a philosophy of government, the Department of Labor cannot play the leading role in any of the arenas with which it is concerned.
That role must be taken by the composite of individuals and institutions which make up our society.
Our job is to serve, to act as a helpful partner to the Nation's citizens and organizations.
To the extent that we increased our ability to perform that job, fiscal 1969 must be considered a success for the Department of Labor.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration, the division which directs and coordinates administrative functions for the Department, this year placed new emphasis on activities aimed at strengthening the agency's capability for effective management.
In support of the President's goal of improved governmental service, the Department established a policy requiring the delegation of maximum feasible program decisionmaking and action-taking authority to field offices.
This action, made necessary by the growing number and increasing complexity of programs, is aimed at providing faster, more individualized, and better coordinated services to the citizens served by the Department.
It is the first step in a long-range plan to move the center of program operations closer to the people the programs are designed to help.
In related activities, the Department participated in a variety of interagency actions aimed at decentralizing and streamlining Federal programs.
These included the realignment of regional boundaries, the designation of regional headquarters cities in common with other agencies providing social and economic services, interagency efforts to reduce the number of contacts local officials must have with Federal officials, and the elimination or easing of Federal administrative requirements.
The Department also took steps to implement an executive branch decision to transfer the Job Corps from the Office of Economic Opportunity to the Department effective July 1, 1969.
This action was taken in order that this vital program could be integrated with other manpower programs administered by the Department.
Intensive analysis and careful planning was initiated so that the transfer could be effected with a minimum of disruption.
Work continued on interrelating the Department's various programs dealing with labor standards.
As a result, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance was transferred to a strengthened Wage and Labor Standards Administration during the year, and the Wage and Hour and Public Contracts Divisions and the Division of Wage Determinations (Davis-Bacon) were scheduled for transfer to this Administration effective July 1, 1969.
The Department also gave considerable attention to the improvement of its management systems and administrative support functions.
Initial steps were taken to establish a departmental data processing center.
Department staff continued their analysis leading to an integrated program and budget activity structure.
The internal audit staff increased its activity in the field offices.
A Federal-State employment security automated accounting system was implemented in three States, and a joint experiment with the General Services Administration was initiated in the "open office space" concept of office layout.
Maintaining its position as a leader and innovator in providing services to its employees, the Department operated an experimental program to provide day care services for children of DOL employees; provided special assistance to employees with personal and workrelated problems; continued a vigorous employee training program; and developed programs to improve interracial understanding and to employ the disadvantaged.
Continuous improvement in minority employment at all grade levels was achieved during the year.
Faster delivery of better manpower services to those in greatest need, coordination of manpower activities, and greater involvement of the business community and State and local organizations were the hallmarks of the Department of Labor's manpower activities during fiscal year 1969.
Major actions toward these goals included the reorganization of the Manpower Administration, special emphasis on programs directed toward the disadvantaged and minority groups, and the development of management tools to evaluate and improve manpower programs.
Responding to a clearly indicated need for coordinated activity in manpower programing, the Secretary in March 1969 established a unified Manpower Administration structure that brought together in one organization all the previously separate units dealing with manpower matters.
The new structure, under the general supervision of the Assistant Secretary for Manpower, places operational responsibility for manpower programs in the Office of the Manpower Administrator.
It provides a single, direct line of authority from the Manpower Administrator to 10 regional offices and one additional office established for the District of Columbia.
Under the reorganization, regional manpower administrators have wider latitude in dealing with local problems, including authority for contract approvals, so that delivery of manpower services is both faster and more efficient.
A single new component, the U.S. Training and Employment Service, combines the major activities of the former Bureau of Employment Security (BES), and the Bureau of Work-Training Programs.
The Unemployment Insurance Service, formerly part of BES, now operates as an independent unit reporting to the Manpower Administrator.
The Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT), the Office of Financial and Management Systems, the Office of Policy, Evaluation, and Research, the Office of Manpower Management Data Systems, and the Office of Information continue to report directly to the Manpower Administrator.
With the exception of BAT and the Veterans Employment Service, whose field staffs remain under the direct line supervision of their respective national offices, all Manpower Administration field personnel are realigned under the regional manpower administrators.
The transfer of more authority to the regional Manpower Administration offices set the stage for more localized manpower efforts and placed greater responsibility on State, area, and local community action agencies.
Organizational difficulties in achieving desired results were recognized at the start, and a method of encouraging cooperative action was developed.
By the end of the fiscal year, the Cooperative Area Manpower Planning System (CAMPS), a system of cooperative planning and action by eight Federal agencies with significant manpower or related concerns, was expanded to about 400 area committees.
Plans were also developed to expand area, State, and regional CAMPS staffs.
The reorganization and its related actions significantly improved the Labor Department's ability to insure unemployed and underemployed Americans with the best possible manpower services.
But they did not finish the job.
They did not adequately transform the patchwork of manpower programs developed in recent years into a comprehensive, coordinated system in which persons in every part of the country could get individually tailored assistance.
Consequently, the Labor Department developed a legislative proposal which would eliminate program categories and set up a coordinated manpower system jointly administered by Federal, State, and local governments.
Nearly completed by the end of the year, this legislation would provide a better manpower framework for individuals who need help, for communities across the Nation, and for the economy as a whole.
The 2,200 local offices of the employment service, the nationwide State-Federal network which provides assistance to persons needing help in career selection, training, or placement, this year processed nearly 10 million applications.
Applicants received job and personal counseling, referral to training or job opportunities, and supportive services to help with various medical, legal, or child-care problems.
Persons served included the disadvantaged and hard-core unemployed, farmers and rural workers, veterans, youth, older workers, the underemployed, welfare recipients, minority group members, handicapped persons, and professional and technical personnel.
Listing over 7.9 million job openings during the year, the employment service made 5.5 million placements in nonagricultural jobs and in training or work-experience programs.
While job listings were of all types, and applications came from workers at all levels, the employment service placed special emphasis on serving disadvantaged persons—those who are poor, without suitable employment, and either dropouts, minority group members, under 22, over 45, or handicapped.
More than 18 percent of the 5.5 million placements made by the employment service in 1969 were for the disadvantaged, and 37 percent were for Negroes and other minority group members.
To improve services to disadvantaged applicants, testing tools and techniques were developed to aid in recognizing the interests and abilities of the disadvantaged, and work sample projects were established in 12 cities.
An Industrial Services Handbook was introduced to help employers fully to utilize disadvantaged applicants in filling job openings and developing upgrading programs.
To facilitate the applicant's search for a suitable job, computerized job banks—similar to Baltimore's year-old model—were set up on a limited and experimental scale in New York City, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Sacramento, Calif.
Madison, Wis., is working with a job bank system that could be expanded into a statewide operation.
These job banks use computers to produce lists of available jobs that are revised and printed daily and made available to interviewers who match the applicants' interests and abilities with the job listing.
Thirty-six other areas are developing job banks that will become operational in fiscal year 1970.
Utah has carried this idea further, using computers to match a worker's skills and interests with suitable and available jobs on a statewide basis.
Carrying out Department responsibility in the Nation's immigration program, the employment service also processed 112,445 applications from aliens during the year.
In 1969, the Department of Labor continued to put great emphasis on manpower training and work-experience programs designed to prepare the disadvantaged for steady, productive jobs.
Institutional (classroom) training programs under the Manpower Development and Training Act (MDTA) helped an estimated 135,000 unemployed or underemployed persons improve their skills and increase their earning ability.
Preliminary figures also indicate that another 85,000 persons—about 65 percent of them disadvantaged—enrolled during the year in MDTA on-the-job programs where they received training for such jobs as machinist, tool and diemaker, carpenter.
Together institutional and on-the-job programs provided training for an estimated 800 different occupations.
Placing particular attention on the need for reaching out to those disadvantaged persons most in need of help, the four States which had entered the new Work Incentive Program (WIN) by the end of fiscal 1969 enrolled 80,869 welfare recipients.
Of these, 62,000 were either placed in or awaiting training or work-experience which would enable them to become productive citizens.
Sponsors of the Job Opportunities in the Business Sector (JOBS) program also used"outreach" techniques during the year, combing their communities for disadvantaged persons who could be hired first and trained later.
JOBS, whose first contract was signed just prior to the beginning of fiscal year 1969, is a joint effort of the Department and the National Alliance of Businessmen (NAB) to hire and train over 600,000 disadvantaged jobless persons in 131 of the Nation's largest cities by June 1971.
This is accomplished through independent programs totally financed by employers and by programs funded by the Department.
Under the federally assisted portion of the program, 1,068 contracts were signed with private emplovers for a total Federal investment of $274 million.
This Government and business commitment has enabled over 58,000 disadvantaged persons to enroll in the JOBS program; 27,900 were still in training at the close of fiscal 1969.
In special programs for youth, over 543,000 disadvantaged youngsters participated during the year in work-experience and training projects under the Neighborhood Youth Corps in-school and out-of-school programs.
In addition to the operating programs, plans for the Public Service Careers program were developed to secure, within merit principles, permanent employment for the disadvantaged in public agencies at all governmental levels, as well as to stimulate upgrading of other present employees.
Realizing that particular groups of Americans such as farmworkers and veterans suffer employment problems that require special attention, the Department continued to give these citizens the personalized attention they need.
In efforts to assist farmworkers, local public employment offices made 4.819.000 agricultural placements, an increase of 5 percent over fiscal 1968.
Some 110.300 migratory workers were assisted under the Annual Worker Plan, which seeks to insure itineraries that give migratory workers as much employment as possible during the year.
Housing standards were also improved for migratory workers, and all interstate job orders are now checked in order to make sure that housing complies with the requirements.
Orders offering substandard housing are not accepted for recruitment.
It was a mark of progress for American workers that the number of foreign contract workers employed in agriculture and logging in fiscal 1969 dropped by 5,450 from the preceding year.
1.1 million nonagricultural jobs.
The 155,000 disabled applicants were placed in 119,500 jobs.
Some 176,000 veterans received at least one employment counseling interview related to such problems as job choice, change of occupation, and compatibility of job with physical disabilities.
More than half a million returning veterans were visited or received a letter or telephone call explaining benefits and offering assistance.
The State agencies also presented 534 employment briefing sessions on military bases, which were attended by 26,500 career military retirees.
In cooperation with the Jaycees (formally the U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce), the State employment service local offices inaugurated in 1969 a national program for acquainting returning veterans with companies and industries in their home area.
Using the '"buddy system," a Jaycee introduces a veteran to local businessmen, arranges plant tours, or advises him about employment prospects.
Several hundred local Jaycees chapters have active programs.
More than 300,000 apprentices received training during fiscal 1969 in programs registered under the combined Federal-State registration system; 111,000 were new registrants—an alltime high.
New apprenticeship programs numbered 4,500 with more than 19,000 apprentices under indenture.
The staff of the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) maintained a workload of about 20,000 apprenticeship accounts, covering more than 100,000 employers and 170,000 registered apprentices.
Minority participation in registered apprenticeship in the federally serviced workload continued to rise.
At the end of fiscal 1969, minority group members in registered apprenticeship programs reached 7.6 percent of the total, rising from 6.5 percent at the beginning of the year.
This meant an increase of 2,233 persons to a total of 12,833 apprentices, with 8.8 percent of new registrants being minority youth.
In addition, the number of cities using outreach training programs to train and assist minorities in getting into the building and construction trade unions increased from 23 to 61, and 3,500 minority group members were assisted under outreach programs.
The BAT staff also helped industry develop and install nearly 600 new programs for skill improvement of 27,500 workers.
These programs provided remedial and advanced education for journeymen, production operators, and semiskilled workers as well as for supervisory and managerial personnel.
The Federal-State unemployment insurance system recorded its lowest rate in claims filed since World War II: 1.06 million per week or 2.1 percent of insured workers.
2.0 billion in benefits were awarded to 4.2 million claimants.
Employer (payroll) tax revenues totaled $2.6 billion (1.5 percent) of taxable wages or 0.8 percent of total wages for calendar year 1968.
Reserves in the unemployment trust fund rose to $12.1 billion, the highest total in the program's history.
Average weekly benefits rose to $45.22 from $42.10 in 1968, due to increased wages in covered employment and increased maximum benefit amounts allowed under State laws.
Benefits to unemployed Federal workers and ex-servicemen totaled $125 million.
Allowances paid to displaced workers under the Automotive Products Trade Act totaled only $253,000.
The program is rapidly phasing out since legislative authority for new certifications expired at the end of fiscal 1968.
Self-appraisal procedure was introduced in all States as a means of decentralizing responsibility for the monitoring of operations to assure proper and efficient administration.
Where deficiencies were identified, action plans were formulated by the States and incorporated in their operating budgets.
With this decentralization of monitoring and appraisal activities, the Department was able to give increased attention to development of management methods, performance standards, program evaluation, and the training of State management analysis staff.
New procedures for assisting claimants toward reemployment were introduced in selected areas for testing and development.
The purpose is to give claimants constructive guidance and assistance while examining their eligibility for benefits and reduce demands on the employment service for interviewing those claimants who need only a minimum of guidance to find jobs for themselves.
The unemployment insurance system was called upon for additional support to the Nation's manpower programs through the administration of income maintenance provisions for persons enrolled in certain training and rehabilitation projects.
Revised and expanded arrangements were established for payment of training allowances under MDTA.
Procedures were developed and put into operation for making wage payments under WIN and, on an experimental basis, under the NYC summer program.
Draft legislation, nearly complete by the end of the year, was also developed to strengthen and update the Nation's unemployment insurance system by expanding coverage to some 5.3 million additional workers, encouraging States to raise their benefit levels, making it possible for covered workers in all States to receive unemployment benefits while they are enrolled in programs to increase their employability, and providing a built-in trigger which would automatically extend the length of time workers may receive benefits in the event the national jobless rate for insured workers reaches 4.5 percent for 3 consecutive months.
The Manpower Administration budget for 1969 ($1.92 billion) increased by $315.78 million over fiscal year 1968 ($1.60 billion).
This represented an increase of about 20 percent, with the CEP, JOBS, and WIN programs receiving more than half of the increase.
But budget increases alone are not enough to improve manpower services.
For more effective assessment of the importance of manpower programs, emphasis was shifted from evaluation of individual projects to measurement of the impact of programs on clients and their communities.
Automated data systems were set up for the JOBS, WIN, and Concentrated Employment programs.
Monthly summaries of current enrollment in all work and training programs (except apprenticeship) are now available, reporting data from March 1968 to the present.
For the first time, the impact of these programs in reaching the disadvantaged was shown: enrollment in June 1969 was 583,000 as compared with 427,000 in June 1968.
Also a single comparative table was compiled on the characteristics (age, sex, race, education, welfare status, and length of unemployment) of the enrollees in these programs.
Project status reports on all work and training programs were developed to list projects by city, State, and region.
These will be used as management tools for monitoring individual projects and evaluating program efficiency at the various geographic levels.
In addition, studies were undertaken of the impact of the total manpower effort on four metropolitan areas: Denver, Boston, Newark, N.J., and San Francisco-Oakland.
The Employment Service Automated Reporting System is operating in three test States—Oregon, Texas, and Vermont—and is scheduled for nationwide implementation by July 1, 1970.
This system will provide information on all employment services provided to individuals, including characteristics of the people served in each ES operation, such as counseling, referral to training, or placement in programs or jobs.
Several management improvement techniques were also developed and applied.
A cost-accounting system was installed in three State agencies—in Pennsylvania.
Rhode Island, and Oregon.
Most of the other States have submitted plans for similar installations which will take place during fiscal 1970.
Also, an automated auxiliary accounting system was designed to improve accounting, reporting, and control of Manpower Administration program funds.
All 54 State employment security agencies used a new and improved plan of service system to support their requests for manpower funds.
The Department's experimental and demonstration program develops new methods through which manpower programs can aid the disadvantaged more effectively.
The work sample assessment technique.
Other innovations now being used include job upgrading for low-wage employees in the JOBS program and incity residential support centers for youth enrolled in the Job Corps who cannot effectively benefit in training or employment because of home and family difficulties.
Manpower research concentrated on the problems of the disadvantaged and on ways to increase employment opportunities for youth, the rural poor, and minority groups.
In addition, studies sought solutions to the economic and employment problems involved in planning for a smooth transition to a civilian economy and in maintaining an orderly pace of technological change.
The institutional grant program, which during the past 3 years supported manpower research in seven institutions, will be opened in 1970 to 10 new colleges and universities.
The Manpower Administration made 45 awards under its small-grants program in 1969, bringing to 135 the total number of doctoral candidates assisted and to 86 the number of other scholars receiving support.
Safety and health continued in 1969 as a major concern in the Wage and Labor Standards Administration, while new emphasis was put on helping the disadvantaged, and on increasing Federal-State cooperation.
Safety and health regulations for Federal supply contracts were significantly changed and strengthened under the Public Contracts Act.
To draw upon the best expertise available and to broaden the participation of concerned and affected parties in making such regulations, the Department adopted by reference the consensus safety standards of four voluntary national standards-setting organizations.
This step was taken after extended public hearings and a review by the Secretary's National Safety Advisory Committee, representing labor, industry, and the public.
Federal agency regulations were also adopted by reference.
Despite considerable opposition, an occupational noise limit was included in the standards—the first under Federal law.
Standards were also issued limiting exposures to about 400 toxic dusts, mists, and gases, including coal dust—another first in Federal law.
Permissible radiation exposures for uranium miners were reduced, as scheduled in a previously issued Department order.
Despite initial apprehension in the industry, most mines had been able to meet the requirement without undue difficulty or expense, Department investigators have found.
F'urtuer reductions of accidents and injuries were achieved in the 10-year-old longshore and shipyard safety program.
Despite a more than 40-percent drop, however, the longshore industry still has a long way to go to match industry in general.
Federal injury rates in calendar 1968 also turned down, reversing the trend in 1967.
To date, the Mission SAFETY-70 program has helped avoid about 16,000 disabling injuries, and saved about $12 million in costs.
In the field of youth safety, new regulations issued by the Secretary of Labor permit 14- and 15-year-olds properly trained in a vocational agricultural program to operate tractors and other machines for employers who offer maximum safety protections.
Youths 16 and 17 years old are also now permitted to drive school buses under approved State programs.
The conditions under which youths of this age may drive other vehicles for hire were also liberalized.
Statutory coverage of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act was extended in 1968 to State and local law enforcement officers who are killed or injured under circumstances involving a crime against the United States.
Coverage was also extended by administrative determinations to a number of participants in various work-training programs in instances where they are engaged in work-training activities at a Federal installation and are under the supervision of a Federal employee.
Included are participants in various work-training programs authorized by the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, as amended; adult Indians receiving work-training experiences under 25 U.S.C. 309 and 309a; participants in the Work Incentive Program established and funded under the provisions of the 1967 amendments to the Social Security Act; and participants in work-training programs under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
A total of 222,319 injuries were reported in fiscal 1969 under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, a decrease of 3,022 from the previous year; injuries reported under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and its extensions were 96,944, an increase of 2,366 over fiscal 1968; and injuries totaled 28,721 under the District of Columbia Compensation Act—up 142 from the previous year.
The Employees' Compensation Appeals Board docketed 190 new appeals during the year and 168 cases were closed, leaving 65 cases pending at the end of the year.
As the year ended, new draft legislation for a comprehensive occupational safety and health bill was prepared for Congress.
Legislation to establish safety and health standards for Federal construction and federally supported construction was close to enactment.
The Department made particular efforts in 1969 to have its programs reach the minority worker, the worker suffering from discrimination, and other disadvantaged persons.
Of particular significance is the "Revised Philadelphia Plan" under which minority employment standards will be established for federally involved construction in the Philadelphia area.
The plan requires that contractors bidding on federally involved construction include with their bids the number of "minorities" that they plan to employ in various crafts.
Negotiations continued during the year with a number of major companies aimed at correcting all discriminatory practices in their plants and providing adequate affirmative action programs.
Agreement was reached with five of the major textile firms on written affirmative action compliance programs.
These firms agreed to take affirmative action in minority recruitment, hiring, placement, and promotion, and to report such actions on a quarterly basis.
In the area of equal employment opportunity for women, employers having Federal contracts will be required to take affirmative action to bring about equal employment opportunity when new guidelines with respect to sex, which were published in the Federal Register last winter, take effect.
A primary goal in improving the status of women workers during the year was to improve the employability of low-income women and girls with less than a high school education.
Expanded vocational guidance and counseling was urged in speeches, magazine articles, and Department publications.
Industry and unions were encouraged to provide increased apprenticeship opportunities for women.
To stimulate interest in better vocational training for women in Federal prisons, job interests of women in two prisons were surveyed and consultations were held with representatives of industry and Government and correction officials to determine the kinds of training and related work experience suitable for Federal female reformatories.
Recognizing that adequate day care services are crucial to the employability of many low-income women, the Department led the way by operating a pilot center for its own employees.
A 1968 survey of hospitals concerning day care facilities for employees brought requests for information from 250 hospitals interested in establishing such programs.
Federal Funds for Day Care Projects" was revised, and a new"Day Care Fact Sheet" was widely distributed.
A continuing effort was also made to upgrade the jobs in which women with limited skills and educational qualifications are employed.
Considerable technical assistance and resource materials were provided to the National Committee on Household Employment, to similar organizations in a number of States, and to other concerned groups and individuals in an effort to improve the workers' conditions in household employment.
Included was a departmental publication stressing the need for minimum wage and other labor standards, entitled "Labor Laws Affecting Private Household Workers."
To promote greater utilization of mature women's skills, the study "How You Can Help Reduce Barriers to the Employment of Mature Women" was published.
Numerous seminars, conferences, and similar programs on continuing education and job opportunities were organized to help older women wishing to enter or reenter the work force.
The Department continued to move forward on the antipoverty front as elimination of violations of the Federal wage-hour laws moved thousands of low-income families above the poverty level, and enabled thousands of other persons to attain at least the basic necessities of life.
Investigations conducted in fiscal 1969 revealed 477,434 workers illegally underpaid approximately $89 million.
The underpayments were in violation of the minimum wage, overtime compensation, and equal pay requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Federal Government's contracts acts, and other wage laws administered by the Department.
Investigations during the first 12 months following its effective date also disclosed 497 firms in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.
In the Department's wage determination program involving the Davis-Bacon Act, as amended, and over 50 related prevailing wage statutes, 27,281 wage determinations were issued during fiscal year 1969.
Area wage determinations were increased to 400.
Increasingly, these necessitated on-site surveys to ascertain residential wage rates prevailing for houses and walk-up apartments constructed with Federal funds or under federally assisted programs.
A major accomplishment during fiscal 1969 in improving Federal-State relationships involved information and compliance contracts with State and local officials in all 50 States to implement the Supreme Court decision extending coverage under the Fair Labor Standards Act to employees of public school systems, hospitals, and institutions of higher education.
As a result, substantial compliance was achieved, and over $4.5 million of back wages was paid voluntarily to State and local employees without investigation.
This represented a good illustration of Federal-State cooperation to achieve widespread compliance without expenditure of large amounts of Federal funds and is in line with the Administration's voluntary compliance program.
In an effort to improve the services provided State labor departments, the State data program was intensified, concentrating on socioeconomic indicators and labor department budgeting and staffing patterns.
Profiles describing economic conditions, sociological patterns, and governmental structures were compiled for several States.
Fiscal 1969 saw very heavy labor standards legislative activity at the State level; 4,000 bills were introduced, compared with 1,900 the previous year.
Legislatures were also more responsive to worker needs and demands, passing 700 as against 200 the year before.
Most widely noticed was the West Virginia "black lung" compensation bill for miners, passed at the strong insistence of rank and file miners.
Texas passed a minimum wage bill, the first in 50 years, and covered certain farmworkers.
Minimum wage rates were increased in Maine, Hawaii, Maryland, Nevada, North Carolina, South Dakota, Vermont, and Guam.
Arkansas enacted a prevailing wage law.
Equal pay acts were passed in Idaho, Florida, and Minnesota.
Minnesota, Montana, Oklahoma, Utah, and Washington restricted discharges resulting from wage garnishments.
Technical help was given several States on improvements in workmen's compensation laws, and in administration, with special emphasis on occupational diseases.
Several States passed improved laws.
Wyoming enacted an occupational disease law.
Special studies were started on compensation for nonspecific and delayed injuries.
Information and technical assistance were provided to State commissions on the status of women, women's organizations, unions, and management groups concerned with labor legislation affecting women and laws relating to their legal status.
In May a national meeting of State commissions on the status of women was held in Washington, D.C., at which plans were made to set up a federation of State commissions to strengthen State-Federal relationships in programs to improve the status of women.
The Office of the Solicitor provides the Labor Department with a wealth of legal services related to the Department's responsibility of administering certain laws.
It also assists in formulating and preparing the Department's legislative program, and provides legal guidance in the development of departmental policy.
In executing these functions during fiscal 1969, the Office placed special attention on legal activities in the field of equal employment opportunity.
The Solicitor handles legal proceedings involving the laws enforced and administered by the Department.
This function includes, among other things, representing the Secretary in the institution and prosecution of all civil court actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Equal Pay Act, and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967; and preparing the briefs and conducting oral arguments in the appellate courts in these cases.
The Solicitor also performs legal services in the preparation, institution, and trial of enforcement cases under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 and other laws.
During fiscal 1969, certain operating functions were performed in the administration of the Davis-Bacon Act and related statutes respecting the predetermination of prevailing wages on Federal and federally assisted construction contracts.
The division of the Solicitor's Office responsible for these duties was transferred, effective at the start of fiscal 1970, to the Wage and Labor Standards Administration.
The Solicitor continues to render legal advice and assistance under the Davis-Bacon program, as he does regarding all the Department's other operating functions.
The Division of Litigation registered several alltime records in 1969.
Cases instituted by the Washington staff or under its supervision under the Fair Labor Standards Act, Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act totaled 1,929—112 more than in any previous year.
Cases closed came to 2,038, up 297 over the previous record.
Restitution of back wages due under the same statutes and obtained through the efforts of the Solicitor's Office totaled $7,460,670.59—42 percent above the previous record.
Reflected in these record highs is increased enforcement activity under the Equal Pay Act.
Close to $1 million ($973,069) was recovered in back wages found due under that law and over 5,000 women received wage increases for the future as the result of cases filed or settled by the Solicitor's Office.
Probably the most significant court decisions from the standpoint of enforcement of the Fair Labor Standards Act in furtherance of the rights of employees were handed down by three courts of appeals.
They were Wirtz v. Malthor, Inc., 391 F. 2d 1 (C.A. 9); Wirtz v. Harper Buffing Machine Company, 18 WH Cases 894 (C.A. 2), affirming per curiam 280 F. Supp.
376; and Shultz v. Mack Farland (C.A. 5).
These decisions sustained the Department's position that the district courts have little or no discretion for refusing to restrain the withholding of back wages found due in actions under the law's section 17.
These courts have specifically ruled that such factors as the employer's good faith, the small size of his business, or financial hardship, do not warrant denial of such relief.
In the field of employees' compensation, recoveries in third-party actions brought by 1,384 injured Federal employees totaled $8,019,- 746.77.
Direct refunds to the Government came to $1,018,577.73 with additional savings in medical costs of $148,960.
Outstanding success was also achieved in litigation under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
Out of 62 decisions in cases submitted for judicial review—13 of which were court of appeals decisions—the Department's position was sustained in all but one.
Four decisions under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (LMRDA) were highly significant.
One was John Edward Price v. Wirtz, upholding the Department's position that once an attorney engages in "persuader"activities for an employer within the meaning of section 203(b)—that is, activities aimed at persuading employees regarding exercise of their organizing and collective bargaining rights—he must report not only his receipts and disbursements in connection with such"persuader" clients but also all receipts and disbursements for "nonpersuader"clients.
Wirtz v. National Maritime Union of America held that union members lack standing to challenge election rules formulated by the Secretary of Labor in supervising a union election of officers pursuant to a court order entered in a case under title IV of LMRDA.
In Wirtz v. Local Unions Nos. 18, 18A, 18B and 18C, International Union of Operating Engineers, the court held that the requirement that candidates for local union office must be members of the parent local union was an unreasonable qualification imposed in violation of section 401(e) of the LMRDA.
Also, in Wirtz v. Local 153, Glass Bottle Blowers Association, the Department's position was upheld.
It contended that the union's meeting attendance requirement was an unreasonable qualification imposed in violation of section 401(e) of the LMRDA and that such violation may have affected the outcome of the challenged election.
The Division of Legislation prepared drafts of legislation in many areas during fiscal 1969.
This being a time of transition in national government, legislation was drafted for both the former and the present Administrations.
Prior to January 20, 1969, bills were introduced in the 91st Congress to provide increased benefits under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, more complete protection for funds invested in employee welfare and pension plans, more adequate disability and survivorship benefits for uranium miners, greater encouragement to the States to improve their workmen's compensation laws, and a procedure for establishing national occupational safety and health standards.
After January 20, 1969, a bill was introduced in Congress to meet the crisis in financing the administrative costs of the employment security program by changing collection from an annual to a quarterly basis.
In the last half of fiscal 1969, the Division was engaged in work on draft legislation to establish a comprehensive national manpower policy and to provide procedures for establishing and enforcing national occupational safety and health standards.
The Division also played a major part in preparing testimony and briefing materials for use by Department officials before congressional committees.
The Division prepared testimony in the areas of mine, construction, and occupational safety and health; common situs picketing in the construction industry; adequacy of services to older workers; increased protection of welfare and pension funds; and possible application of Federal collective bargaining legislation to farm labor.
Eighty-nine hearings were held by the hearing examiners, 45 involving violations of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act and 24 involving violations of the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act.
Thirty-eight decisions were rendered in Walsh-Healey cases and 13 decisions in Service Contract Act cases.
In connection with the Department's international responsibilities, legal services included those pertaining to tariffs and trade and trade agreements matters, and involved departmental consideration of and reports on pending and proposed legislation and, generally, matters relating to the Department's participation in the interagency committee structures in this field under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 and the cotton textile program.
Legal services pertaining to the International Labor Organization and the related area of human rights included review and preparation of law and practice reports, proposed executive branch positions, and letters on Conventions and Recommendations adopted by the ILO, and the furnishing of a staff member who served as technical adviser to the U.S. Delegation in the 53rd Session of the ILO in Geneva.
Regulations and interpretative guidelines concerning labor standards in Federal service contracts were promulgated in final form (29 CFR Part 4); a number of amendments to child labor regulations under the Fair Labor Standards Act were made (29 CFR Part 1500); an expanded discussion of the overtime requirements applicable to seasonal industries under that act was added to the overtime bulletin (29 CFR Part 778); and the interpretative bulletin on the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 was expanded (29 CFR Part 860).
Comprehensive regulations implementing departmental administration of the safety and health standards for Federal supply contracts established under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act were prepared and published.
New standards were established dealing with such matters as industrial noise, gases, dust—including coal dust in mining—and exposure to radiation in mines.
The Consumer Credit Protection Act of 1968 is under study and regulations are being prepared to implement Title III, Restrictions on Garnishments, which become effective on July 1, 1970.
A new housing code for agricultural workers was developed and published (20 CFR 620).
It denies the use of the Labor Department's interstate recruitment services for the referral of farm and logging workers to inadequate, unsafe, or unsanitary housing conditions.
Legal services were provided for a series of expanded manpower employment assistance and training programs designed to enlist the resources of the private business sector.
Most significant was the close continuing legal support provided the JOBS program undertaken by the Manpower Administration in cooperation with the National Alliance of Businessmen.
Standardized contracting instruments were developed for use in the manpower training and related programs.
Particularly significant was the preparation of general provisions for use in all cost reimbursement contracts of the Manpower Administration.
Referrals to the Department of Justice for prosecutive consideration included numerous cases of disclosure of fraud arising out of manpower programs, including immigration, as well as 85 veterans' reemployment rights claims.
A significant decision by the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Collins v. Weirton Steel Company supported our position that probationary employment is other than temporary within the meaning of the Universal Military Training and Service Act.
An unemployment insurance bill was prepared in accordance with the President's desire to strengthen the Federal-State unemployment insurance system.
There was a trend during the year toward consolidation of State employment security agencies with other State agencies.
1. With respect to the unemployment compensation program, an authority that is "the State agency" for the purposes of the Social Security Act, the Federal Unemployment Tax Act, and 5 U.S.C. ch.
2. With respect to the employment service program, "a State agency vested with all powers necessary to cooperate with the United States Employment Service" under the Wagner-Peyser Act.
The Secretary of Labor, however, may waive this single agency requirement under authority conferred by section 204 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 if certain specified requirements are met.
The Division of Labor Relations and Civil Rights provided advisory legal services concerning laws affecting labor-management relations and civil rights, and prepared case analyses and legal memoranda in support of Department of Justice litigation.
It assisted the Department of Justice on its brief in BRT v. Atlantic Coast Line Railroad, where the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia reversed the ruling of the District Court and held that the union was not required to bargain on a "national basis" on the question of crew consist.
As a result of depositions taken by union counsel in connection with a civil proceeding styled U.S. v. FEC, and evidence later adduced, a criminal investigation was undertaken to determine if FEC had violated the provisions of the Railway Labor Act thereby incurring its criminal sanctions.
Legal memoranda were submitted to the Department of Justice concerning BLFE v. United States and BLE v. NMB.
In the former, the Division advised that the Brotherhood was entitled to a jury trial in a contempt proceeding, pursuant to section 2 of the Norris-LaGuardia Act.
In the latter case, it agreed with the Board that the question of which of two unions had the right to represent engineer apprentices under a jointly proposed apprenticeship program should properly be resolved through collective bargaining under the Railway Labor Act.
At the suggestion of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance, the Division participated in numerous negotiations toward obtaining voluntary compliance with the equal opportunity requirements of Executive Order 11246.
Debarment hearings were held in the cases of Allen-Bradley Co. and Bethlehem Steel, Inc.
A notice of hearings was sent in the Timken Roller Bearing case but a conciliation agreement was executed between Timken and the Department prior to hearing.
Executive Order 11375 amended E.O. 11246 to provide for the prohibition of sex discrimination in Federal and federally assisted contracts; 41 CFR 60-1 and 41 CFR 50-201 were amended accordingly.
Additionally, the views of labor and industry were solicited during hearings which were held on proposed guidelines for this new equal employment opportunity requirement.
The Division also provided legal services required in the development of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance's new approach, first implemented in Philadelphia, for insuring equal employment opportunity in federally involved construction work.
Extensive legal memoranda were prepared on questions of substantive law related to this plan, and guidance was provided to insure that the approach meet certain procurement law and other legal considerations.
Division activities under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 have involved joint investigations with the Department of Justice into discriminatory State employment service practices.
These investigations resulted in the filing of the first suit under title VI against a State employment service.
U.S. v. OBES et al.
In view of its suit against Ohio, a related action in which the Department was a defendant was dismissed as to the Federal defendant.
Jamar v. OBES et al.
Additionally, the Department recommends corrective action and specific selection and referral systems by the Texas employment security offices to promote equal employment opportunity.
Several States have also been persuaded to record applicants' race to facilitate greater referral and placement of minority group members.
As national concern about inflation sharpened interest in price statistics during fiscal 1969, the Bureau of Labor Statistics took important steps toward improving the timeliness and quality of existing price indexes and creating new indexes.
Indexes of individual items in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) which were formerly published quarterly in a separate report were published monthly beginning in January 1969 as a part of the CPI report.
The time lag between the pricing date and publication of the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) was shortened.
Coverage of certain WPI sectors, particularly for electronic components and aircraft, was strengthened.
Analyses of new methods of adjusting prices for quality change continued with completion of a report on the use of the hedonic quality measurement in price indexes.
To measure the price competitiveness of U.S. exports in international trade, new surveys were initiated and collection of comparative bid data was begun.
A major accomplishment was the publication of new family budgets which estimate dollar expenditures at three levels of living and provide indexes to measure comparative living costs in major cities.
These budgets were based on spring 1967 cost estimates for an urban family of four.
Similar budgets for urban retired couples have been completed and will be ready for publication next year.
Also, plans were completed for carrying out pilot housing and consumer expenditures surveys in two metropolitan areas as an initial phase of the comprehensive revision of the CPI scheduled to be completed in January 1975.
There was notable emphasis on the continuation of major expansion of labor force data for individual geographic areas in the Department's 1969 research programs.
As part of this effort, unemployment by age-color-sex characteristics were made available for the 10 largest States and 9 major regions for the first time since the 1960 census.
An analysis of unemployment developments in the 20 largest metropolitan areas and 14 of their central cities was again undertaken, and regular quarterly publication of labor force data in the Nation's largest 100 poverty neighborhoods was instituted.
There was also a significant expansion of published information on the Nation's labor force from the Current Population Survey.
New information, shedding new light on the reasons for unemployment, was provided on how many individuals lost their jobs, voluntarily left their jobs, or were new entrants into the labor force.
More detailed information was also made available on persons who were not in the labor force and on their jobseeking intentions.
The first results from the Urban Employment Surveys were also published.
Conducted in the Concentrated Employment Program areas of six large cities, these surveys are designed to measure in depth the job problems and barriers to employment of slum residents.
The 1970-71 edition of the "Occupational Outlook Handbook" was completed.
The Handbook, designed for use in vocational guidance, provides detailed information on the outlook for employment for the Nation's youth in over 700 occupations and 30 industries.
The study“Tomorrow's Manpower Needs" was published.
This report is designed to aid State and local manpower analysts in developing projections of manpower requirements by occupation for use in planning education and training for their own areas by use of national manpower information.
The study includes projections of the number of workers that must be trained annually in 240 occupations that include more than half the workers in the United States.
Data collection in the Labor Turnover Program was expanded to cover nonmanufacturing industries in 26 major metropolitan areas.
To help develop new policies and programs in construction manpower and to encourage additional research, a study was made of seasonality and manpower in construction.
A large scale survey program designed to collect data on job vacancies in industry was launched in January 1969 in 51 of the Nation's largest metropolitan areas.
Research about minorities, low-income families, the working poor, and methods of income maintenance, including public welfare, resulted in several reports, including "Recent Trends in the Social and Economic Conditions of Negroes in America," "Changes in Urban America,""Perspectives on Poverty," and "Dimensions in the Urban Crisis."
The Current Population Statistics micro data base was expanded and applied to specific problems such as the definition of subemployment, the "universe of need" for manpower programs, the earnings and work experience of teenagers, and the study being conducted by the President's Commission on an All-Volunteer Army.
BLS expanded its computer capabilities for analytic work in two respects.
First, access to a remote computer was given through two typewriter-like terminals, which are operated directly by the analyst.
Second, overnight access to the BLS data bank through the BLS Information System was inaugurated, decreasing the average time needed to respond to the needs of the Bureau analysts.
Plans were developed in some detail for the proposed large-scale, 70-area labor force survey following the 1970 Census of Population and Housing.
Work was begun on a study of the dynamics of unemployment over the business cycle, with particular reference to the long-term unemployed.
Two training courses in econometric methods were given to Bureau personnel.
In line with the Department's goal of developing indexes of output per man-hour for all industries with 50,000 or more employees, new indexes were published for the motor vehicle and the radio and television industries, and work was virtually completed for several industries, including gray iron foundries and corrugated boxes.
The employment impact of exports by industry and by State was analyzed, and a new study was started to determine the hypothetical employment required to produce imported goods that compete directly with goods produced in the United States.
As part of the Interagency Growth Project, a study of employment generated by private investment was completed.
For the first time, data were prepared on compensation and hours of work for all employees in the private nonfarm economy.
A model was developed for predicting short-term changes in hourly compensation.
Work started on the first survey of wages and hours of noninstructional employees of educational institutions, public and private.
The purpose is to assess impact of extension of the Fair Labor Standards Act to these institutions.
A general study of the relationship between minimum wages and young unemployment was also begun.
Labor Law and Practice" reports were published for Argentina, Botswana, Chile, Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Peru, and South Viet Nam.
Special reports were prepared on Central America, labor in the USSR, on-the-job training and wage-hour standards in foreign countries, and transition from school to work in selected countries.
BLS cosponsored with the New York Department of Labor the 27th North American Conference on Labor Statistics which had as a theme "The Role of Labor Statistics and Research in Public and Private Decision-Making."
The 300 delegates included administrators, statisticians, and economists of State, Provincial, and Federal departments of labor and education, universities, labor organizations, and business firms.
The Labor-Management Services Administration carries out the Labor Department's duties of enforcing Federal laws regulating union elections, veterans' reemployment rights, and reports on union activities and employee welfare and pension plans.
It also strives to help both employers and workers improve the Nation's collective bargaining system, and it was this aspect of its efforts which saw greatest innovation during fiscal 1969.
The Federal Government's role in major labor-management disputes shifted during the last half of the fiscal year toward less direct intervention.
The policy of disengagement was first demonstrated in the last weeks of the longshore dispute.
Federal mediators assisted, but it was emphasized to the parties that the responsibility for settlement rested with them and that the Government did not intend to make their decisions.
In subsequent major disputes with national repercussions, the Department's approach was applied further—in the case of the Railroad Signalmen's threatened strike, and again in the Pan American World Airways-Teamsters dispute.
A policy of "do-it-yourself" was underlined by the Department's role in these and other disputes.
Early warning reports covering disputes which could affect the national interest were provided to the Secretary on a regular basis.
Detailed reports were prepared on specific major disputes setting forth background information, collective bargaining issues, and positions of the parties.
Supplementary status reports were submitted to the Secretary as warranted by the progress of negotiations.
The various reports covered labor-management disputes in a wide variety of industries including railroads, airlines, offshore maritime, longshore, shipbuilding, and lumber and logging.
Staff members were assigned to assist four Presidential Emergency Boards appointed to investigate and report on disputes in the railroad industry.
Two of the Emergency Boards concerned disputes involving all of the Nation's railroads.
Assistance was provided to an arbitration board which held hearings and issued determinations relating to away-from-home expenses of certain classes of railroad workers.
Office of Federal Contract Compliance of alleged employment discrimination.
Work was conducted on two major studies designed to assist management and union officials in particular industries in resolving special problems.
The Railroad Shopcraft Factfinding Study was completed and transmitted to the parties at the end of September 1968.
This study had been recommended by the Special Board appointed by the President to provide for the settlement of the dispute between the railroad industry and its shopcraft employees represented by six unions.
Another factfinding study, this one relating to railroad conductors' road freight trips, was started during the year.
This study is being conducted at the request of the union and the railroad industry in accordance with a collective bargaining agreement.
The purpose of the undertaking is to develop factual material for use by the parties in future negotiations.
Under the Mass Transportation Act of 1964, the Secretary is responsible for protecting the interests of employees affected by federally sponsored programs to improve bus, rail, and rapid transit transportation systems.
As a condition of Federal assistance by the Department of Transportation, the Department of Labor must certify that the required employee protection has been provided.
The Department reviews all applications and determines whetherthe provisions proposed are fair and equitable for the employees involved.
The number of applications under the program has increased each year since the statute was enacted.
During 1969, certifications were made on 55 applications, having a total project cost of more than $335 million.
Representation of Federal employees by labor organizations continued its upward trend in fiscal year 1969.
Since Executive Order 10988 was issued in 1962, the number of Federal employees represented by labor organizations granted exclusive recognition has increased to 1.4 million, or 52 percent of the Federal work force.
Slightly more than 2,300 units in 35 agencies of the Government have been granted exclusive recognition, and nearly 1,200 bargaining agreements have been negotiated.
Close liaison was maintained with the Civil Service Commission concerning development of guidance instructions on employee relations for the Federal Personnel Manual.
The Department also took part in continuing studies of labor-management relations in the Federal service with a view to recommending revisions in the Executive order.
Since Executive Order 10988, the Department has received 219 requests for arbitrators, and 64 advisory decisions have been issued.
Twenty-five Federal agencies have been involved.
The administration of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) and the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act (WPPDA) progressed satisfactorily in 1969.
By the end of the 1969 fiscal year, the Department had on file reports from 51,526 active reporting labor organizations.
Approximately 3,700 investigations were completed under the LMRDA.
Thirty-three civil actions involving the Department were instituted under the act in Federal district courts.
Fifty-three individuals were charged with criminal violations of the LMRDA in indictments or criminal informations filed in Federal district; 39 persons, including some who had been indicted in prior years, were convicted, and two were acquitted.
The indictments against three others were dismissed.
Approximately 158,000 active employee-benefit plans were on file with the Department under the WPPDA as of June 30, 1969.
Of these, about 33,500 were retirement plans.
About 1,350 delinquent or deficient reporting investigations were completed.
Bills relating to welfare and pension plans and sponsored by the Department in the 90th Congress have been reintroduced by congressional sponsors in the 91st Congress.
No formal Administration position has been taken on these bills.
One category of bills would amend the Welfare and Pensions Plans Disclosure Act to (1) provide standards of fiduciary responsibility, (2) increase disclosure and require annual audit, (3) bar from fiduciary positions persons convicted of specified crimes, and (4) expand enforcement powers of the Secretary.
It is expected that an Administration bill will be introduced at an early date.
The revised bill is being drafted in collaboration with the Department of Commerce.
Other bills deal with vesting, funding, and plan termination protection (insurance).
A task force of the Departments of Commerce and Labor is preparing a review of all aspects of the pension plan "security" issues of vesting, funding, insurance, and portability.
When this has been completed, the Administration's position will be determined.
In December 1968, the Advisory Council on Employee Welfare and Pension Benefit Plans unanimously recommended the enactment of a Federal statute setting forth standards of fiduciary responsibility in the handling of welfare and pension plan assets.
The Department's responsibilities to veterans in connection with reemployment rights increased substantially again during fiscal year 1969.
There were 942,000 separations from the Armed Forces.
As in the past 2 years, the number of complaint cases increased sharply—from 3,066 to 3,946—more than a 28-percent increase over fiscal 1968, and more than two and a half times greater than fiscal 1967.
The armed services placed more emphasis upon assuring that each person separated participated in the cooperatively established referral procedure.
During the latter months of fiscal 1969, about 70 percent of the separating veterans participated, and each was sent basic information about the services available to them through the Department of Labor.
As in the past, copies of the referral forms were made available to the Veterans Administration so that a special effort could be made by that agency to encourage the completion of high school education by those veterans who had not already done so.
The basic protections afforded by the reemployment rights law were also called to the attention of affected employers through this procedure.
Because of this, many reemployments were effected without further action by the Office of Veterans' Reemployment Rights.
In the absence of this procedure, the complaint caseload would have increased bevond the abilities of the existing staff to handle such a workload.
Research and policy development activities in the labor-management relations field included analysis and review of existing legislative and administrative policies.
Such matters as settlement of emergency disputes and effects of seasonality on the construction industry were examined.
Research efforts during the past year were directed primarily toward providing advice and assistance to other Government agencies and the academic community, and conducting specialized studies to provide policy guidance within the Department.
Research activities directly related to the administration of the LMRDA involved providing litigation assistance to the Solicitor of Labor.
One study titled "Large Local Unions: Their Financial and Administrative Characteristics" was sent to the printer during the year.
A study was made of the characteristies of local and national unions to assist the Solicitor and the LMSA in litigation under the LMRDA.
Advisory unit arbitration decisions under Executive Order 10988 was the subject of another research study that was published during the year—"Federal Employee Unit Arbitration."
In the field of international labor, a wide range of important activities were continued in 1969.
The Department of Labor International Technical Assistance Corps (DOLITAC) provided technical aid for projects sponsored primarily by the Agency for International Development (AID) in Brazil, Panama, Central America, Guyana, Bolivia, Morocco, Tunisia, Thailand, Okinawa, South Vietnam, Micronesia, Korea, India, and Turkey.
The Secretary addressed the 50th anniversary conference of the International Labor Organization at Geneva while the U.S. Delegation played a key role in the work of the Organization's technical and political committees.
The Special Assistant to the Secretary for International Affairs served as Chairman of the ILO Governing Body during the year.
A Joint United States-Japan Employment Study—the second of such joint studies—was prepared in cooperation with the Japanese Ministry of Labor and published.
Training and cultural exchange programs in the labor and manpower fields were arranged by the Department for 489 foreign nationals visiting the United States under the auspices of AID, the Department of State, and other organizations.
More than 500,000 persons viewed labor exhibits on the U.S. worker presented by the Department in Latin America (Guatemala-Honduras, Colombia, and Ecuador), and in Kinshasa, Congo.
Seminars and exhibits on industrial safety were conducted in Hungary, Poland, and Turkey, and one on labor-management relations was presented in Turkey.
In the field of international trade policy, work continued on a number of major issues, including international fair labor standards, textile imports, new trade legislation, and problems arising from various industrialization programs along the U.S.-Mexican border.
The Department continued to share in U.S. participation in the work of such regional economic organizations as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and in the work of the United Nations relating to economic and social affairs and manpower.
The Department began preparations for the Third Inter-American Conference of Labor Ministers, scheduled for October 1969 in Washington.
With the Department as official host, the Conference was expected to attract delegations from about 20 nations in the Western Hemisphere.
At the close of the fiscal year, a Labor Attache Conference for U.S. Labor Officers from Europe and Africa was held in Tunis under the joint sponsorship of the Departments of Labor and State and financed by the Labor Department from excess foreign currency funds.
The Labor Department conducted a wide range of information activities during fiscal 1969 to keep the American people abreast of the services available to them.
All forms of mass media were utilized in this effort.
More than 700 individual press releases reporting on events affecting Department policies, programs, and activities were issued.
Among these were monthly reports on employment and prices—two of the Nation's most important economic indicators.
Weekly press packets were compiled and distributed to over 3,000 newspapers and magazines, reaching millions of union members, residents of small towns or rural areas, and members of minority groups.
The Department answered hundreds of thousands of requests for information and publications.
Requests came from a cross section of Americans—students, educators, businessmen, union members, government officials, newsmen, and the general public.
They also were received from individuals and organizations outside the country.
A variety of publications covering activities pertaining to the workplace, the labor market, and the collective bargaining table were written and edited.
A booklet listing available Department publications was prepared and updated monthly.
One major departmental magazine was begun during the year and another was revised significantly.
The first issue of Manpower, the monthly journal of the Manpower Administration, appeared in January.
The magazine, which contains articles by authors both inside and out of the Labor Department, serves as a forum for ideas related to manpower problems and their solutions.
The seope of the Monthly Labor Review was expanded during the year and the magazine's layout and design were revised to improve readability.
The major periodical of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, this magazine contains articles related to the Nation's economy, employment situation, and labor movement.
Artwork and layout for both magazines were done by the Department's arts and graphics division.
This unit also designed posters, leaflets, publications, and other visual materials.
The exhibits unit prepared and set up displays related to departmental programs and functions.
Unit members worked with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to develop "Man Puts Man on the Moon," a combination of film, animation, slides, and soundtrack describing the skill and manpower that went into the Apollo program.
The electronic news media played a more vital role than ever in the Department's information program.
For the year saw a significant expansion of the Department's efforts to make more effective use of radio and television for explaining the wide range of programs, policies, and services affecting the Nation's expanding work force.
The Department also stepped up the use of photographs for telling its story.
As part of theDepartment's people-to-people information activities, the Secretary of Labor and other top officials addressed a variety of organizations and held press conferences at which they discussed departmental programs and objectives.
Other Labor Department representatives spoke to hundreds of youth and adult groups across the Nation.
The Department conducted its fourth annual Summer Jobs Campaign during the fiscal year, opening more than a million extra jobs for work-age youngsters during the summer of 1968.
The annual Stay-in-School Campaign was also conducted.
This program aims to reduce the Nation's school dropout rate by showing youngsters the value of a good education.
Both these campaigns were carried to the Nation through posters, flyers, direct mailings, records, radio and television announcements, and newspaper and magazine ads and editorials.
The Stay-in-School Campaign also relied heavily on the support of the Advertising Council, an organization which enlists the voluntary support of the advertising industry in causes which warrant national concern.
In fiscal 1969, the Advertising Council prompted the Nation's advertising media to donate more than $38.5 million worth of advertising space and time to the Council's Continue Your Education Campaign.
While most of the Department's information activities were directed toward the public, plans were also made in fiscal 1969 to establish a biweekly newsletter for agency employees.
The newsletter, which will be distributed in the field offices as well as in Washington, will report on departmental policy decisions, programs, personnel activities, and major staff changes.