In 1913, the Labor Department was created “to foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners of the United States, to improve their working conditions, and to advance their opportunities for profitable employment.
This broad and far-reaching charter is equally applicable today when the needs of workers and prospective workers are quite different from those of the early 20th century.
The Department's continuing advance toward these goals required operational changes to increase its responsiveness to the disparate needs of those it serves.
In fiscal 1970, we worked hard to bring our programs closer to the American people and to increase the efficiency of delivery systems.
These actions were vitally important in light of changing national priorities.
The employment situation was undergoing changes—particularly in certain geographical and occupational areas—as we strove to combat inflation and switch from a wartime economy to a peacetime economy.
Realizing there would be transitional disruptions in our economy, we sought to keep unemployment as low as possible.
To meet the challenges of a changing economic climate and of making our services more responsive, we found it imperative to adopt changes in some organizational units, programs, and policies.
The activities of the Wage and Labor Standards Administration, which touch the lives of almost every working American, were thoroughly analyzed.
It was found that the organizational structure of this Administration badly needed overhauling to enhance its ability to meet the myriad needs of working men and women.
This organization's functions cover such diverse fields as equal employment opportunity, women's opportunities, wages and hours, job safety and health, and Federal employee compensation.
By the end of the fiscal year, a blueprint for reorganizing this strategic unit into the Workplace Standards Administration had been drawn up and readied for implementation.
The reorganization plan— aimed at greater efficiency and speedier delivery of services—featured: consolidation of the activities of six bureaus, integration of their staff support, a combined and coordinated field staff of skilled investigators, and greater decentralization of activities.
In another major development, the Manpower Administration continued its decentralization of activities initiated in 1969.
Regional offices throughout the country were strengthened and given greater responsibilities.
Manpower program operations were increasingly being handled by State and local offices.
In addition, the Solicitor's Office was reorganized along program lines, the Labor-Management Services Administration field functions were consolidated, and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration acted to increase the authority of regional offices and improve coordination between the national and regional offices.
In an era when the American people are showing greater interest in every aspect of the world of work, the Department continued efforts on a broad front in 1970 to improve the overall conditions of those men and women who work and those disadvantaged persons who want to work.
In no field did we work harder than in the area of equal employment opportunity.
For no domestic problem of the day is more worthy of our attention.
This past year saw significant strides toward achieving America's longstanding goal of equality of opportunity at the workplace.
The Department's first major act of 1970 in this field was the launching of the Philadelphia Plan.
This plan requires contractors to make good-faith efforts to meet established goals and timetables for hiring minority group members in the construction trades on federally involved projects in the Philadelphia area.
The crafts covered by the plan are high-paying mechanical erafts from which minorities largely have been exeluded in the past.
A short time after the Philadelphia Plan was announced, the Department launched a nationwide drive for voluntary or "hometown" solutions aimed at achieving equal employment opportunity in construction work.
This type of solution involves local construction contractors, labor unions, and minority coalitions developing their own areawide equal employment opportunity agreements that cover private as well as federally involved construction.
Negotiations toward these local accords are aided by whatever Department of Labor technical assistance is desired by the parties involved; where local parties cannot reach a hometown solution, the Department stands ready to impose a plan based on the Philadelphia Plan's concept of goals and timetables.
These programs had begun to meet with suecess in 1970.
By year's end, 10 area construction plans had been adopted.
Eight plans were voluntary and two were imposed, including one in Washington, D.C. A third effort in this area involved the issuance of regulations concerning affirmative action requirements for Federal contractors outside the construction industry.
The Department was also active in efforts to assure equal employment opportunity for women.
It issued guidelines to bring about job equality for women in federally involved contract work.
These guidelines related to employment opportunities, wages, hours, and other conditions of employment.
Numerous compliance reviews were conducted by Federal agencies across the country to assure that equal opportunity regulations and guidelines were being observed.
In a year when we worked to offset a slowing economy and improve the prospects of the unemployed and underemployed, the Department's Manpower Administration bolstered its efforts to meet these challenges.
The Administration's actions included the revamping of some programs and the expanding of others to better serve those in need of various kinds of manpower assistance.
The Department concentrated its strengthening efforts in several areas: upgrading the meaningfulness of the work and educational experiences involved, greater participation of local officials and organizations in program development, and personalizing of each program for participants.
The Job Opportunities in the Business Sector (JOBS) program was expanded during the year to cover a variety of geographical areas across the Nation.
This program, which enlists the aid of private business in hiring and training the hard-core unemployed, is but one example of public and private partnership aimed at improving the quality of American life.
When the Jobs Corps was transferred to the Department of Labor at the beginning of the fiscal year, a task of rehabilitation was undertaken.
There was little coordination between it and the other Federal manpower training programs and services.
In the short span of 1 year, urban Job Corps centers were set up, job coordination with their surrounding communities was established, and link-ups with other manpower programs were effected.
The employment service tackled the enormous tasks of job placement and counseling for millions of individuals, recruitment of trainees for Federal manpower training programs, and rendering of speeial services to veterans and disadvantaged groups.
One of the new ways that the Department was able to help unemployed Americans was through enactment of the Disaster Relief Act.
More than $10 million was paid out to persons who became unemployed as a result of natural disasters.
Through the Manpower Administration's program channels, the Department made certain adjustments that enabled it to soften the impact of the Nation's changed economic circumstances.
Some of these adjustments included the reprograming of JOBS funds to expand institutional training activities, reimbursing State and loeal governments for the training cost of filling regular job vacancies with disadvantaged workers, establishing an “early warning layoff procedure" in the employment service, and increasing the number of computerized Job Banks.
These measures helped maintain a viable program in the face of a slower growing economy.
Of greater help, however, would have been the enactment of three legislative proposals we had made to enable us to respond more quickly to money crises of the poor, the disadvantaged, and the unemployed.
Unfortunately, by year's end, none of these bills had been enacted into law.
One of these proposals was the Unemployment Insurance Act, which would have vastly increased the number of people protected by unemployment insurance benefits, many of whom are in lower wage and often unstable jobs.
One of the most important aspects of this bill, its “trigger" mechanism, was specifically designed to provide rapid response to rising unemployment.
When the insured unemployment rate equals or exceeds 4.5 percent for 3 consecutive months, the duration of unemployment benefits would be automatically extended by up to 13 weeks.
This bill was close to passage at the close of the fiscal year.
A second proposal, the Manpower Training Act, also contained a "trigger" mechanism.
Under this measure, funds available for manpower programs would be automatically increased if the national unemployment rate reached the level necessary to trigger extended unemployment insurance benefits.
Taken together, the “triggers" in these two proposals would markedly increase the effectiveness of manpower programs as economic stabilizers.
This would be achieved because training programs cushion the impact of unemployment while reducing inflationary pressures.
The Manpower Training Act also would provide for the decategorization and decentralization of the administration of manpower programs.
Regardless of the needs of the time and the nature of local circumstances, we now are forced to divide our manpower funds among specified programs whose form largely has been preordained by Federal statute or regulation.
This situation exists even though we know that each community has its own distinct needs and problems, and that both the economic and local situations change with time.
A manpower system should be flexible enough to permit local officials to adapt their programs to local needs and to permit rapid adjustments to meet priorities.
The third proposal that would have beneficially affected our manpower and economic situation was the Family Assistance Plan.
It would have helped those still not protected by unemployment insurance, aided the working but low-paid poor, and assisted many not now enrolled in our manpower programs because of insufficient training opportunities.
Recognizing that the workplace is a highly important part of the environment, the Department continued striving to make job sites more healthful and safe for all working Americans.
We continued operating many longstanding educational and operational safety programs and saw enactment of two long-needed bills concerning safety in the construction and mining industries.
We already have moved to meet our responsibilities under these new laws.
The Department pressed forward in its efforts to gain enactment of the Nation's first comprehensive occupational safety and health legislation.
We worked on the drafting and passage of a constructive bill designed to reduce the toll of on-the-job deaths and disabling injuries which occur in America each year.
Approximately 14,000 Americans are killed and 2 million others suffer disabling injuries at work each year.
We cannot allow workers to continue paying this price at work.
The passage of an occupational safety and health bill would eliminate many dangerous factors in our work environment.
The overall area of worker protection involves more than just occupational safety.
The Department continued its efforts on behalf of current and prospective American workers in the enforcement of laws pertaining to minimum wages, child labor, equal pay, age discrimination, and overtime pay.
In addition to following up an increased number of employee complaints, the Wage and Hour Division initiated thousands of investigations to seek out and correct substandard working conditions.
The American world of work is a symbol of our democracy and one very important aspect of that democracy is our system of free collective bargaining.
The Department of Labor feels that the most satisfactory collective bargaining agreement can be reached only between the parties involved.
It has therefore followed a policy of offering a helping hand when needed, but not the heavy hand of government intervention.
Time has proved that this policy has worked, is working, and will continue to work.
The institution of collective bargaining has spread increasingly to government employee relations.
The year saw rapid growth in the formation and activity of unions in the public sector.
A major event in this area of activity during the fiscal year was the signing by President Nixon of Executive Order 11491, which made sweeping improvements in the Federal labor-management relations program.
This new directive will substantially strengthen the Federal labor relations system by bringing it more into line with practices in the private sector of the economy.
Legislative proposals offered in fiscal year 1970 in the labor-management relations area included the Emergency Public Interest Protection Act and the Employee Benefits Protection Act.
The Emergency Public Interest Protection Act of 1970 would provide greater protection for the public against the damaging effects of work stoppages in the transportation industry and correct some of the existing deficiencies in Federal law relating to that industry.
The proposed Employee Benefits Protection Act would provide a uniform source of law for evaluating the conduct of persons acting on behalf of employee benefit plans and for a single system of reporting and disclosure in lieu of burdensome multiple reports required under the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act.
George P. Shultz was Secretary of Labor during the Department's 58th year.
Two days after the close of the fiscal year, he was sworn in as director of the newly established Office of Management and Budget.
I was then sworn in as the twelfth Secretary of Labor after having served for a year and a half as Under Secretary.
The developments of 1970 reveal in clear terms that, as an executive department, we pushed forward with a people-oriented program characterized by one overriding purpose: to forge higher standards and conditions of employment for working Americans as they contribute to the general well-being of the richest Nation in the world.
But we recognize that our efforts in 1970 represented only a start toward carrying out the forward-looking program that was launched the year before and that has just begun to bear fruit for our expanding, highly skilled work force.
We now look toward reaching not just immediate goals but long-term targets as well.
Change will be the hallmark of the decade of the seventies.
And this Department, as well as the entire American people, must be prepared to respond swiftly to social and economic change.
Clearly, one of the principal challenges facing us in this decade will be to meet the myriad needs of a labor force that is expected to exceed 100 million by 1980.
The immediate change that we have to continue dealing with is the change in economic climate that has resulted in employment transitions in certain geographic and occupational areas as the Nation fights inflation and shifts from a wartime to a peacetime economy.
To meet the challenges of the new decade, the Department must get results from the programs and policies that have been set in motion.
We must gain enactment of our wide-ranging legislative proposals.
We must continue improving the managerial effectiveness of our programs and services.
We must enlist the wholehearted support of the private sector in improving every facet of working life.
I am confident that the Department of Labor, working in concert with all levels of government and the private sector, will meet the exciting challenges that lie before us.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration directs and coordinates the administrative functions of the Department by providing a full range of staff support services for its varied and increasingly expanding programs.
In support of the President's effort to bring Government services closer to the people, the Office issued guidelines to increase the authority of regional offices and improve coordination between headquarters and regional offices.
Administrative support services for the Office of the Secretary were consolidated in a newly created Office of Executive Services.
This division provides budget preparation and execution, program planning and analysis, personnel management, and management analysis, as well as a variety of general services.
The Office of Investigations and Security was established to consolidate physical, personnel, and document security.
Comptroller General approval was obtained for a new standardized accounting system for Federal-State employment security agencies.
By the end of the fiscal year, 26 State agencies had installed the new system and all State agencies and Manpower Administration grantees were reporting costs on an accrual basis.
To effectively centralize electronic data processing support services and significantly reduce outside contracting for them, the Department established a data processing center and installed a large scale computer facility that allows several programs to run simultaneously.
This new electronic data processing center will accelerate the Department's efforts to integrate its personnel, payroll, and budget systems.
The Department continued as a leader in providing services to its employees.
Its low-cost day care center was expanded in fiscal year 1970 to care for 70 children of Department employees, who, without this facility, might not have been able to work.
This was twice the number of children cared for during the previous year.
Project Insight" was the title of a series of workshops designed to stimulate improved race relations in the Department.
One hundred and fifty supervisors attended these seminars, where they were able to explore their racial attitudes.
In addition, a 40-hour course in management techniques was introduced to improve the overall effectiveness of supervisors.
The Department's library houses an outstanding collection of publications on labor laws and history, historical labor documents, and other trade union materials.
The use of this facility increased this year, with over 3,700 people from all over the United States and the world making use of services through interlibrary loans and personal visits.
A pilot project was undertaken to examine a new concept in office space planning.
The Office Landscape Pilot Project studied the latest techniques in work flow, furnishings, open work areas, and communications systems.
Streamlined service characterized the Manpower Administration in fiscal year 1970.
During the previous year, many of its functions had been reorganized, combined, and strengthened.
Decentralization of authority and further merging of activities followed in fiscal 1970, with a new efficiency underscored by use of computerized information systems.
A change in focus reflected new national priorities.
In a shift to peacetime programs, veterans returning to civilian life in large numbers received special guidance on job training and job placement.
Urgent anti-inflationary measures slowing the growth of employment created new emphasis on training for jobs in occupations and in geographic areas where labor shortages continued to exist.
At the same time, the Manpower Administration explored speedier ways of aiding the unemployed and underemployed, particularly during this transition period.
Disadvantaged groups received special help through individualized services complementing job training.
Three major pieces of legislation aimed at coordinating and improving manpower services were proposed by the Administration during fiscal year 1970.
They are the Manpower Training Act, the Family Assistance Act, and the Employment Security Amendments of 1970.
Passage of the former two would reshape Manpower Administration activities in future years.
The proposed Manpower Training Act would create a Federal-State-local partnership for delivery of manpower services.
The Manpower Administration would also be deeply involved in providing eligible welfare recipients and the working poor with the work incentives, training, and work experience required under the Family Assistance Act.
Enactment of the third proposal would bring unemployment protection to 4.75 million additional workers, provide for larger benefits for the qualified unemployed, and improve financing and administration of the program.
Aiming to place more authority for manpower programs at the State and local level, the Manpower Administration, as early as 1969, offered grants to governors to support manpower planning specialists.
In April 1970, similar manpower planning grants were offered to the mayors of 135 of the largest cities.
By the end of the fiscal year, 50 grants to mayors had been funded and indications were that the number of cities receiving these grants would rise to approximately 120.
As the States and localities gain staff capacity, they are being delegated added responsibility and authority for manpower program operations.
Contracting authority for on-the-job training projects under the Manpower Development and Training Act (MDTA) has been delegated to the States, primarily to the State employment security agencies.
States have approval authority for 20 percent of all MDTA-funded programs if they are in accord with the approved State Cooperative Area Manpower Planning System (CAMPS) plan.
Further delegation of authority was in the planning stage at the end of fiscal year 1970.
Decentralization also characterized the activities of the Manpower Administration.
Greater authority was given regional offices, and an area operations office was added to each regional office to oversee manpower programs within specific States.
In a sharper delineation of line and staff assignments, regional manpower administrators were granted new authority to contract for and manage manpower programs.
A total of 155 positions were transferred to the regions from the national office.
Responsibility for compliance reviews and for investigation of complaints of equal employment violations was shifted from the Office of Equal Employment Opportunity to regional offices.
At the national office, a restructuring of functions of the Office of the Deputy Manpower Administrator and of the U.S. Training and Employment Service (USTES) was undertaken.
Direction of field operations is now vested entirely within the Office of the Deputy Manpower Administrator.
The function of USTES to serve as a principal staff arm of the Manpower Administration is now more clearly delineated.
The Manpower Administration's Office of Policy, Evaluation and Research was also reorganized during fiscal year 1970.
Two major subelements were created—the Office of Planning and Evaluation and the Office of Research and Development.
Changes in the economy and in national priorities, development of new techniques, research, and evaluation of ongoing programs required changes and redesign of program goals and operations.
During fiscal year 1970, significant changes were made in the Concentrated Employment Program (CEP), Job Opportunities in the Business Sector (JOBS), and Neighborhood Youth Corps (NYC) programs and in State employment service operations.
The redesign of CEP clarified the roles of the employment service and the Community Action Agencies, with CEP prime sponsors (usually CAA's) concentrating on overall management or coordination, and the employment service generally responsible for delivery of manpower services to enrollees.
JOBS, which expanded nationwide, placed increased emphasis on upgrading.
The redesigned NYC program stresses meaningful work experience and remedial education rather than income for its enrollees.
The State employment services have embarked on a major restructuring of their operations.
Computerized job banks have been installed in 42 cities and job-matching systems have been started in several States.
Streamlined delivery systems in 10 large metropolitan areas provide a range of services geared to applicants in three categories: the job ready, the job ready who have special problems, and the disadvantaged.
Assistance to the first group is largely self-help; the second receive counseling, testing, and such other services as they need; and the third receive in-depth service tailored to individual needs.
Significant progress was also made during fiscal year 1970 on minority staffing of the State employment services.
Minority staffing in the past year increased from 12 percent to 14 percent of the nearly 64,000 State employment service employees.
To achieve more equitable employment of the members of minorities in the State employment security agencies, the Departments of Labor and of Health, Education, and Welfare have undertaken a thorough examination of the rules, guidelines, and operations of the State merit systems.
The Federal-State network of 2,400 local offices in 54 jurisdictions received nearly 10 million new applications for jobs during the year and made 4.6 million nonagricultural placements.
Jobseekers were given counseling and referred to jobs, manpower training, or supportive services.
Special emphasis was given to offering individualized services to the disadvantaged.
An “employability plan" which included followup after placement was developed for those individuals needing sustained attention.
Local employment offices recruited trainees for Job Opportunities in the Business Sector; for the Job Corps; for work-experience programs such as the Neighborhood Youth Corps and Operation Mainstream; and for MDTA training.
About 120,000 men and women acquired new skills through institutional training in classrooms.
Institutional training has been the backbone of MDTA programs since the Manpower Development and Training Act was passed in 1962.
Operation Mainstream helped 12,500 adults, many of them on welfare, gain steady work at decent pay.
The program operated chiefly in rural areas and small towns, providing work experience for undereducated men and women—mostly 45 and older—in conservation, beautification, and antipollution efforts in their own communities.
New in fiscal 1970 was a program to help the disadvantaged qualify for government jobs.
The Public Service Careers (PSC) program sought to help those who wished to enter career-ladder jobs in public service agencies at the Federal, State, or local level.
It also aimed at helping workers in low-level jobs in government upgrade their skills to move into positions of higher pay and greater responsibility.
The Work Incentive Program (WIN), begun the previous year to help employable adults receiving assistance under the federally supported program of Aid to Families with Dependent Children, became operative nationwide.
During the year, 132,969 enrollees—80 percent of them women—sought training, work experience, or other services through this program.
Because of a predominance of women enrollees, however, a major difficulty arose due to a shortage of child-care facilities.
The Concentrated Employment Program (CEP), in which the Community Action Agency is usually the prime sponsor, had 76 projects in operation, including 13 in rural areas.
Total enrollment since the beginning of the program reached an estimated 297,000.
The Manpower Administration continued to work with the National Alliance of Businessmen in steering the hard-core unemployed to jobs and training in private industry.
The JOBS program, chartered in January 1968 to help the long-term jobless and those with low skills, aided 86,800 men and women in fiscal year 1970.
The business sector cooperated by hiring the disadvantaged at normal job-entry wages, then training them on the job, or by upgrading low-skill workers.
These persons receive preliminary health care, transportation, basic counseling, and job orientation.
The Department of Labor then repays cooperating industries for extraordinary costs in hiring and training.
The JOBS program was expanded to nationwide coverage and is no longer restricted to large metropolitan areas.
The Neighborhood Youth Corps helped 435,900 young people under 21 years of age find part-time or summer jobs to help them stay in school.
It also helped 46,200 young people no longer in school receive skills training and work experience.
The out-of-school program is partieularly geared to youth under the age of 18, who often have difficulty in finding a job.
Groups facing special employment problems received personalized attention.
State and local office veterans employment representatives (VER's) saw that veterans got top priority in job and training referrals.
Other groups, such as older workers, the physically and mentally handicapped, young people, or members of minority groups, received special help.
Local employment service offices used specialized techniques and a special staff to assist these workers in getting jobs or training to help them become more employable.
The Farm Labor and Rural Manpower Service offered manpower services to workers and employers in rural areas, particularly those in agricultural and the forestry industries.
Local public employment offices made 4½2 million placements in such employment last year.
The Job Corps became part of the Manpower Administration in the Department of Labor July 1, 1969.
Its transfer from the Office of Economic Opportunity aimed at providing hard-core disadvantaged youth with a wider range of services by integrating the residential training program with existing manpower programs.
Job Corps offers vocational training in over 40 skills to young men and women between the ages of 16 and 21.
It also provides them with basic education, medical and dental care, and instruction in physical education, diet, and hygiene to better prepare them for the world of work.
When the Job Corps was transferred to the Manpower Administration, 48 centers across the Nation were retained—32 Conservation Centers, four large urban Men’s Centers, and 12 Women Centers.
Most urban Job Corps centers drew enrollees from all parts of the country.
This past year saw an innovation in the establishment of new centers more in tune with small urban or metropolitan areas.
Twenty-eight Residential Manpower Centers (RMC's) and Residential Support Centers (RSC’s) are presently being established.
The six RMC's now in operation offer the same variety of programs as older centers, but give more attention to the job climate of the communities in which they are located.
The RSC's—the first scheduled to open early in fiscal 1971—will be residential centers where intensive support and tutoring services will be provided for youth enrolled in vocational and educational programs other than Job Corps.
Operation of older centers has changed substantially.
Programs now emphasize link-ups with other manpower programs and individualized planning for each enrollee.
Residential facilities are being improved.
Conservation center work programs are undertaken only when they provide meaningful skill training.
Trade union programs are being expanded.
Finally, enrollee assignments are being structured geographically so that better recruitment, placement, and followup can be maintained between individual centers and local employment offices.
Each State employment service agency will be linked with specific Job Corps centers.
Apprenticeship and skill improvement programs continued to direct special attention to high school and post-high school youth.
However, concentrated efforts were made to attract not just the high school dropout, but also the complete dropout from society.
During fiscal year 1970, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) directed special attention toward increasing training for journeymen in the construction industry.
Progress on expanding minority group participation in apprenticeship programs was recorled.
Administrative reform in BAT deemphasized the very small registered apprenticeship programs so that the larger registered programs could be serviced more adequately.
Some 357,407 apprentices—including 123,163 new indentures—received training.
By year's end, 39,646 had completed training, while 273,952 were still in programs, learning skills.
In the federally serviced workload, more than 4,300 new apprenticeship programs were developed, and 1,400 terminated.
At the close of the year, active apprenticeship programs numbered 20,163.
Under the skill improvement program, 40,030 production, clerical, and semiskilled workers, journeymen, foremen, and supervisors received a total of 19,377,869 hours of training.
Apprenticeship Information Centers (AIC's), aimed at placing minority youth in apprenticeable occupations, maintained active recruiting in 36 cities.
The Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training was also responsible for serving 61 outreach programs and helping to place qualified Job Corps graduates in apprenticeship programs.
Inflation curbs had an impact on some employment areas.
Through unemployment insurance benefits, more than 5 million persons—30 percent more than in fiscal 1969—were eased through the transition period.
New in fiscal 1970 was the administration of income maintenance provisions of the Disaster Relief Act of 1969.
Payments totaling $10 million helped persons unemployed because of natural disasters in 10 States.
Benefit payments made to eligible persons in those places designated by the President as disaster areas began in December 1969.
2.8 million in unemployment insurance benefits was paid to 5.4 million claimants.
Employer (payroll) tax revenues totaled $2.6 billion, 1.4 percent of taxable wages, or 0.7 percent of total wages for calendar year 1969.
Reserves in the unemployment trust fund rose to $12.4 billion, the highest fiscal year total in the program's history.
Average weekly benefits rose to $48.09, from $45.22 in 1969, as a result of increased wages in covered employment and increased maximum benefit amounts allowed under State laws.
Benefits to unemployed Federal workers and ex-servicemen totaled $183 million.
Allowances totaling $550,000 were paid to workers adversely affected by tariff adjustments on the first petitions ever certified under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
New techniques were developed for interviews on unemployment insurance claims.
The interviews were reoriented to add guidance on the job market to routine examination of entitlement to benefits.
The unemployment insurance system continued to support manpower programs providing incomes for persons enrolled in certain training and rehabilitation projects under the Supplemental Training and Employment Program (STEP).
Rapid link-up of fiscal, statistical, and economic data brought nearer to completion a management-information system to help plan and evaluate programs.
Employers sponsoring training programs, institutions carrying out federally funded programs, and manpower officials at all levels drew on the new streamlined exchange of information.
Automation resulted in substantial dollar savings for the Manpower Administration.
Through a single automated accrual accounting system, replacing independent systems at State employment agencies, computerized information on resources, accomplishments, and costs provided the basis for a cost-based budget.
By year's end, nearly all State agencies were using both the Employment Security Automated Reporting System (ESARS) and the automated accounting system.
A new procedure for auditing contracts was developed to resolve questionable costs and help sponsors improve administration of their programs.
A backlog of 1,947 expired contracts awaiting closeout action was reduced to 472, dwindling from $34 million to $13 million the amount of unused government funds still in the hands of contractors.
A single office—Research and Development—absorbed two separate manpower activities.
The new office merged the former offices of Manpower Research and Special Manpower Projects.
Experimental and demonstration (E&D) programs tested new aproaches to manpower development.
Techniques already proven successful became part of regular manpower training programs.
Noteworthy in this regard in fiscal 1970 was a wider use of minorities to train minorities—a technique situation-tested and approved in past E&D programs.
The technique is now being used in Opportunities Industrialization Centers (primarily for Negroes) and on Project SER (for Mexican Americans in the Southwest).
Neighborhood Youth Corps programs also adopted the “Youth Tutoring Youth" model, in which fellow students encourage potential dropouts to stay in school.
Manpower studies continued to focus on employment problems of youth, the rural and urban poor, and minority groups.
Other projects investigated the extent to which requirements such as special licenses or permits create barriers to employment.
Occupational training in industry was surveyed, and studies were made to develop a computerized comprehensive labor market information system.
The institutional grant program, which during the past 4 years supported manpower research in seven institutions, will give final grants to these institutions in fiscal 1971.
After that, they are expected to carry on their programs with funding from other sources.
Twelve additional schools were awarded 4-year institutional grants, effective August 1970.
The Manpower Administration's small-grants program supported 141 doctoral candidates in their dissertation research and 47 other research projects during fiscal 1970.
The Office of Equal Employment Opportunity made compliance reviews of State employment service operations and investigated complaints concerning manpower programs.
As a result, many violations of the Civil Rights Act—such as segregated facilities, inconspicuous display of informational posters, and acceptance of discriminatory job orders—have become less prevalent.
In addition, substantial gains in guaranteeing equal opportunity have been made by prohibiting and removing any inappropriate remarks on a worker's application and by providing employment service personnel with information on dealing with applicants who are members of minority groups.
One successful technique was the negotiation of formal agreements between States and the Office of Equal Employment Opportunity to insure equal opportunity for all jobseekers.
In an effort to make its services more responsive to the needs of the American work force, the Wage and Labor Standards Administration (WLSA) undertook a reevaluation of its labor standards programs and activities prior to 1970.
This was done at a time of growing interest regarding various types of job problems, quality of work, and job satisfaction.
This appraisal took several forms.
One of the key facets of the reevaluation was to go directly to working men and women and, through the use of a questionnaire, determine what they regard as their central problems with respect to working conditions.
Preliminary data from this survey, which became available during the fiscal year, indicated that sizable proportions of the work force felt that they had grave problems concerning health and safety hazards, unpleasant physical working conditions, inconvenient or excessive hours, and racial discrimination, in that order.
However, more than four-fifths of the workers surveyed were either somewhat or very satisfied with their current jobs, and approximately three-fourths would decide without hesitation to take the same jobs if given a fresh chance.
Along with this evaluation of its labor standards programs, the Department made plans to reorganize the WLSA into the Workplace Standards Administration (WSA).
These plans were well under way by the end of the fiscal year.
The change is expected to improve the delivery of services for many important activities, including equal employment opportunity and occupational safety and health programs.
The proposed WSA will consolidate the activities of the existing Labor Department bureaus which are responsible for Federal contract compliance activities, wage and hour programs, occupational safety and health, programs for women, wage determinations for public construction, and Federal employees' compensation programs.
This new Administration will also provide for integration of the staff support for all six of the bureaus and a common field force for four of them: Bureau of Labor Standards, Wage and Hour Division, Bureau of Employees’ Compensation, and the Office of Wage Determinations.
This organizational arrangement will permit more effective implementation of the Department's responsibilities for obtaining compliance with Federal labor standards in the American workplace.
It is expected to produce administrative efficiencies by combining the common services which presently exist in the six different bureaus for planning, research, personnel management, budget preparation, program evaluation, and other staff services.
A combined and coordinated field force of skilled investigators and specialists located in communities throughout the country will also be brought about by this proposal.
Common direction of this field force will improve its efficiency, eliminate duplicate investigations, and permit wider coverage by Labor Department officials.
It will increase the opportunity for the Department to inspect and observe in order to insure that more workers are protected by Federal labor standards.
It will also provide for greater decentralization of activities and permit establishment of a single place for filing complaints and obtaining information on all labor standards administered and enforced by the Department of Labor.
The year saw an acceleration of the Department's efforts to expand the employment opportunities of minority group members and women in federally involved contract work.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance guided these actions to achieve equity at the workplace.
In September 1969, the Department initiated the Philadelphia Plan for achieving equality in high-paying construction crafts which previously had few minority workers.
The plan requires contractors and subcontractors on federally funded construction projects in the Philadelphia area exceeding $500,000 to meet numerical goals and timetables for hiring minorities.
This plan, like all contract compliance activities, was carried out under Executive Order 11246, which prohibits discrimination in federally involved contract work and requires affirmative action to achieve equal employment opportunity.
Shortly after the Philadelphia Plan was implemented, the Department enunciated a three-point policy for achieving equal opportunity in construction work across the country.
The basic elements of this policy are that (1) the Department favors "hometown" solutions (construction equal opportunity agreements reached by contractors, labor unions, and minority coalitions) ; (2) the Department will provide the local parties with whatever technical assistance it can in developing local agreements to meet local needs; and (3) where the local parties do not reach a hometown solution, the Department will impose a plan based on the Philadelphia Plan's concept of goals and timetables.
Early in the calendar year 1970, the Department launched a nationwide program for bringing about equal opportunity in federally funded contract work.
Eighteen target cities in every section of the country were pinpointed for concentrated efforts to achieve equality.
In announcing the national program, the Department urged the local parties to develop areawide, hometown solutions—agreements that would cover private as well as federally involved construction.
At the same time, the Department offered the parties in these 18 cities assistance in developing their plans.
These efforts began to pay off.
By the end of the fiscal year, 10 area construction plans were in effect.
Two of the plans—those in Philadelphia and Washington, D.C.--were imposed by the Federal Government and eight plans were hometown solutions voluntarily worked out among contractors, unions, and minority coalitions.
The Washington Plan differs from the Philadelphia Plan in that the contractor's commitments to hire minority employees cover not only his federally involved construction but all of his construction work throughout the area during the period he is working on a construction contract involving Federal funds.
The Department also stepped up its compliance activities outside the construction industry.
Another far-reaching development was the issuance of regulations specifying affirmative action requirements for Federal contractors outside the construction industry.
Known as Order No. 4, the new rules are designed to carry out an earlier directive that requires Federal contractors and subcontractors to develop written affirmative action compliance programs for each of their establishments.
The idea behind these regulations is to spell out in clear details precisely what the Government considers affirmative action to be.
During the year, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance was directly involved in several cases which set significant precedent in the equal opportunity field.
These included cases involving seniority rights, validity of applicant testing, affirmative recruitment programs, sex discrimination, and establishment of numerical goals and timetables.
In addition, the Office administered a program in which over 6,000 compliance reviews were conducted by contracting and administering agencies.
The Office also participated in several training conferences with contracting agencies to explain these new standards and also participated in several industry-sponsored seminars.
Actions on behalf of women workers also picked up markedly.
In order to provide women with the same protections afforded minority workers, the Department issued guidelines to assure for the first time that Federal contractors and subcontractors do not discriminate against women with respect to employment opportunities, wages, hours, or other conditions of employment.
Collective bargaining agreements on conditions of employment must be consistent with the guidelines.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, with the assistance of the Department, also revised its Guidelines on Discrimination Because of Sex to provide that State “protective" labor laws applying only to women were in conflict with title VII of the Civil Rights Act.
Subsequently, seven jurisdictions issued rulings to the effect that laws which limit the employment of women are inconsistent with State and Federal laws requiring equal employment opportunity regardless of sex.
These actions were followed up by a variety of programs to open up more job opportunities for women.
Of particular interest was a series of meetings with union women throughout the country to stimulate the interest of these groups in improving the status of women in the work force and to eliminate discrimination against women.
As a result of these meetings, union women in four cities and in three States formed organizations to combat discrimination.
To assist mature women, a pamphlet entitled “Jobfinding Techniques for Mature Women" was published.
At the request of Altrusa International, six programs based on the publication were prepared.
Recognizing that if women were to take advantage of the opportunities offered them they would need more training and also have day care services made available to them, the Department stepped up its efforts in these areas.
Special attention was given to the promotion of industry and union participation in providing child care for children of working mothers.
Day Care Facts" and the report “Child Care Services Provided by Hospitals" were published.
Considerable progress was made this year in developing opportunities for girls and women in apprenticeships.
A new leaflet, "Why Not Be An Apprentice?" was used, and the number of occupations in which women have been apprenticed increased from 48 to 103 in fiscal year 1970.
Upgrading household employment and making it part of a career ladder continued to be a goal of the Department.
To this end, it brought together a number of companies operating in the private household field to discuss industry problems and needs.
The meeting resulted in the organization of an industry association.
A kit of materials on household employment was used to stimulate interest among present and prospective employers, vocational educators, and women's groups, and assistance was given one State in amending its minimum wage order for household workers so as to extend its coverage to all such workers.
The theme of the 50th anniversary celebration of the founding of the Women's Bureau was “American Women at the Crossroads: Directions for the Future.
Anniversary programs reviewed past accomplishments and explored new directions and new dimensions for women and the Women's Bureau.
Of special concern were the needs of girls and women in poverty: training, employment, child care facilities, and family planning services.
Also during the year, the Labor Department announced its support of the Equal Rights Amendment.
Continued technical assistance and advisory services were provided to commissions on the status of women which organized an Interstate Association of Commissions on the Status of Women and to the Office of Voluntary Aetion.
Information was solicited on volunteer projects for the clearinghouse of volunteer activities from State and municipal commissions on the status of women.
Two new Federal laws—the Construction Safety Act of 1969 and the Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969—were enacted during the fiscal year.
To meet its new responsibilities under the Construction Safety Act, the Department formed a Construction Safety Advisory Committee and established a task force to develop safety and health standards.
In connection with its responsibility regarding the “black lung" provisions of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969, the Department has been developing standard criteria which States must meet to qualify for exemption under the act.
To assist employers subject to the safety and health regulations adopted under the Public Contracts Act (PCA), an “Inspection Survey Guide" was developed.
The only quick reference of its kind, it catalogs for the first time in one volume basic industrial hazards and keys them to some 4,100 major standards covering control of these hazards.
Also, a training course on the hazards, measurement, and control of industrial noise under a new PCA regulation was developed jointly by the Department and the U.S. Public Health Service.
The course has been administered to Department personnel and is a prototype for similar training for State, industry, and union personnel including those covered by the Coal Mine Safety Act.
Safety and health regulations under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act were amended to require manufacturers and suppliers of chemical products to provide to purchasers, for the first time, detailed and specific information on fire and explosion, health and radioactivity hazards.
This will provide basic information for use in training courses, better processing controls, and improved labeling.
The regulations also were amended to provide for safety certification of shore-based material-handling devices and container cranes.
Further reductions of accidents and injuries were achieved in the longshore and shipyard safety program.
Since 1960, a 47 percent reduction in the longshoring rate of accidents and injuries and nearly a 53 percent reduction in the shipyard rate have been achieved, while rates in other industries have generally been on the increase.
Another instance where the Department's safety regulations are paying dividends is in uranium mines.
Lung cancer deaths in Colorado peaked at 17 for the vear in 1967, declined to 9 in 1969–70, and are projected, on the basis of the current trend, to be 4 in 1978.
The enforcement of reduced radon daughter levels and the no-smoking rule in mines have brought these unexpected results.
Projections made in 1967 for the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy estimated 20 lung cancer deaths in 1970 with an increase over the years to 22 in 1978.
During hearings on the comprehensive Occupational Safety and Health Aet, which at the time of this report was pending in Congress, it became apparent that the existing data on the extent of work injuries were inadequate and would become seriously so if the bill should be passed.
It was concluded that the Bureau of Labor Statisties work injury data system was the best currently available, but that the Bureau sorely needed additions of manpower and money and a strenuous effort to enroll additional States in a cooperative program of producing reliable work injury statistics.
President Nixon issued a Safety Policy for Federal Employees calling for a "unified, dedicated, and on-going program of accident elimination."
To date, the Federal MISSION SAFETY-70 program has shown a 13 percent reduction in the injury frequency rate.
Since the program was launched in 1965, an estimated 22,500 injuries have been prevented and nearly $22 million saved in direct costs.
In fiscal 1970, there were 120,625 injuries reported under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, a drop of 1,694 from fiscal 1969.
In the same period, injuries reported under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act and its extensions were down 2,245 to 94,699 in fiscal 1970, from 96,944 in the previous year.
Injuries to private employees were down 1,190, from 28,721 in 1969 to 27,531 in 1970.
In the field of youth safety, Child Labor Regulation No. 3 under the Fair Labor Standards Act was amended to permit cooperative experiments with State education departments to discover whether disadvantaged 14- and 15-vear-old vouths can be motivated, by carefully controlled school-work programs, to complete their education rather than drop out early and suffer needless unemployment and alienation.
Seven States are participating in the experiment.
A new hazardous occupations order, affecting employment of youth under 16 in agriculture, was promulgated, replacing a 1968 interim order.
Fifteen States were granted an exemption from Hazardous Occupations Order No. 2 to allow them to continue to employ students under 18 as school bus drivers.
Uniform and vigorous enforcement of the laws for which the Wage and Labor Standards Administration is responsible not only provides direct benefits to the lowest paid segment of the work force, but also affords vital protections to other millions of workers whose weekly paychecks are often barely adequate to meet their needs.
These laws provide for minimum wages, equal pay for equal work regardless of sex, restrictions on employment of child labor, and overtime pay premiums under the FLSA, plus the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, a number of laws regulating the wages and working conditions of employees of Government contractors, and the garnishment restrictions of title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
The bulk of employees not covered by these Federal laws consist of domestic workers, many agricultural workers, public employees other than those employed by State and local schools and hospitals, and employees of smaller retail and service establishments.
As the result of a minimum wage step increase included in the 1966 amendments to the FLSA, some 2.1 million nonfarm workers, who prior to February 1, 1970, were paid less than $1.45 an hour, were entitled to annual wage increases on that date totaling nearly $500 million.
Although the amounts of these wage increases were small in relation to the total economy, representing in 1970 only 0.2 percent of the annual wage bill for all covered employment, the percentage gains for many of these low paid employees were substantial.
During fiscal year 1970, 34,690 complaints, an increase of about 5 percent over the year, were received from the public alleging violations of the various acts.
Much of this increase resulted from the public's heightened awareness of the provisions of the Equal Pay and Age Discrimination in Employment Acts which became effective in June 1968.
Investigating complaints, however, constitutes only about one-half of the Administration's field work.
Substandard labor conditions exist in many places of employment where employees file no complaints because of fear of retribution or lack of knowledge.
The Administration initiates its own investigations in an attempt to correct such conditions.
The total number of investigations conducted in fiscal year 1970 was 68,787.
In addition to investigations and enforcement actions, substantial effort to obtain voluntary compliance was made.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, some 950,000 inquiries and requests for information from the public were answered, and 4,100 public appearances before employer, employee, and local community groups to explain the laws' provisions were made by investigation personnel.
Fiscal vear 1970 investigation results revealed that violations of these laws had cost more than 465,000 employees a total of $93 million in wages to which they were entitled under law.
Nearly one-half of these emplovees were due additional wage payments as a result of minimum wage violations, or violations of the requirement that employees performing equal work receive equal pay regardless of sex.
Disclosures of these two types of violation accounted for most of the increase in wage underpayments over the $89 million disclosed in fiscal year 1969.
Viewed in terms of future benefits, the necessary changes in pay practices in order to correct these violations were equivalent to an annual wage increase of approximately $78 million for the employees of the establishments in which violations were disclosed.
Perhaps even more significant than the correction of these monetary violations was the fact that many thousands of additional employers voluntarily came into compliance with the wage and hour, child labor, equal pay, and anti-age-discrimination provisions as the result of information and education efforts.
Several information and education innovations receiving excellent public acceptance were initiated.
Compliance Utilizing Education" (CUE), a program of voluntary cooperation with large corporate organizations to provide technical assistance for maintaining compliance with the laws within all organizational components, has helped bring more widespread observance of the law to many additional places of employment.
During 1970, such compliance arrangements were initiated with 54 major corporations.
Following a conference in Washington, D.C., in May with over 100 representatives of the press, labor, management, and leaders of groups interested in women's job rights, a series of Equal Pay Act briefing conferences was scheduled in major cities throughout the United States to acquaint more people with the rapidly developing impact this law has been having on employment of women.
In the closing months of fiscal year 1970, major efforts were made to alert all employers, credit organizations, bar associations, and oficials of the various courts concerning the restrictions on wage garnishment contained in title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act which became effective on July 1, 1970.
Under this law, a limitation is placed on the amount of weekly earnings which may be garnished and an employer is prohibited against discharging an employee for the reason of garnishment for any one indebtedness.
In administering the Davis-Bacon and related acts, special emphasis was placed on developing lower wage rates for residential housing construction.
These more realistic wage determinations have decreased Government expenditures and inflationary pressures.
To further assist in this endeavor and to assure the determination of more accurate wage rates for all types of construction, studies were conducted as to the feasibility of computer application, and plans have been formulated for increasing the field staff so that more on-site investigations can be conducted.
The Solicitor of Labor is responsible for all the legal activities of the Department.
Besides serving as legal adviser to the Secretary and other Department officials, he is in charge of the preparation and coordination of the Department's legislative proposals, reports, anltestimony.
The Solicitor is also in charge of litigation for the Department.
This function includes representing the Secretary of Labor in the institution and prosecution of civil court actions involving the Fair Labor Standards Act, Equal Pay Act, and Age Diserimination in Employment Act.
He also provides legal services in cases under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act, the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act, the construction safety and health provisions of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, garnishment provisions of the Consumer Credit Protection Act, and other laws.
Assisting the Solicitor is a staff of aides and attorneys in Washington and in the Department's field offices.
During fiscal 1970, the Washington office was reorganized along program lines into six divisions, each headed by an associate solicitor.
As a result of the reorganization, all legal aspects for each Department program are handled by one division.
This is more efficient than the former arrangement, under which different legal aspects of one program were sometimes handled by different divisions.
The only division which does not specialize along program lines is the Division of Legislation and Legal Counsel, which provides the various legislative services required by the Department.
The Division of Legislation and Legal Counsel performed numerous legal and drafting services regarding the Administration's legislative proposals.
It also began its new function as legal counsel to the Solicitor and to the Assistant Secretary for Policy, Evaluation, and Research.
Legislative proposals on which the Division provided legal services included the "Family Assistance Act," the "Manpower Training Act," the "Occupational Safety and Health Act," the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act amendments, the “Employee Benefits Protection Act," the "Trade Act of 1970," the "Emergency Public Interest Protection Act," the Employment Security Amendments of 1970, legislation to settle the railroad labor-management dispute impasse, and legislation to provide a Federal remedy for assaults and homicides against Department of Labor employees.
The legislation relating to the railroad impasse was enacted.
This Division also helped prepare testimony and briefing materials for use by Labor Department officials before congressional committees.
In addition, it helped prepare testimony on proposed amendments to the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act, a bill to establish a Youth Conservation Corps, the admission of workers into the United States, the revised Philadelphia Plan relating to minority employment on federally involved construction contracts, and emergency procedures with respect to the railroad strike.
Legal assistance was provided in establishing and servicing important new manpower training and employment programs which were launched during the year.
These programs included Public Service Careers, the Supplemental Training and Employment Program, and Job Opportunities in the Business Sector 1970.
The Division was also involved in handling legal problems arising under Immigration and Nationality Act programs.
A departmental task force which included Division representatives studied all areas related to those programs.
The results of the task force's studies are reflected in the Department's position on major pieces of immigration legislation which would greatly revise the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Legal services were provided in connection with the Job Corps, which was delegated to the Department of Labor on July 1, 1969.
These services included the review of leases and contracts for the operation of centers, the review of the proposed guidelines for contractors planning to submit proposals for the operation of residential manpower centers, and the preparation of a model lease for rental of Job Corps centers.
Assistance was lent in the preparation of the Administration's omnibus unemployment insurance bill, which was enacted shortly after the close of the fiscal year.
The Division also defended provisions of State unemployment insurance laws which concern the point at which a hearing must be granted a claimant before unemployment compensation benefits previously determined to be due him can be terminated or suspended.
Some of the provisions which terminate benefits before the hearing have been attacked in several courts as violating the 14th Amendment to the Constitution and two sections of the Social Security Act.
The decisions in these cases can have far-reaching effects on the unemployment insurance system.
An important new interpretation of sections of the Federal Unemployment Tax and Social Security Acts was drafted by the Division and issued by the Secretary.
It permits States to use unemployment compensation claims offices as well as the public employment offices for payment of unemployment compensation.
Past interpretations of these sections had required payment of unemployment compensation solely through public employment offices.
The Division collaborated with the Unemployment Insurance Service in developing "A Guide to Unemployment Insurance Benefit Appeals—Principles and Procedures."
The guide, which was sent to all State employment security agencies, sets forth various methods and procedures for holding a “fair hearing" and encourages simplification of appeals and hearings procedures in the States.
Important regulations and agreements with the States were drafted to carry out a new program of financial assistance to individuals thrown out of work as a result of a major disaster.
The program was authorized by the Disaster Relief Act of 1969, and was delegated to the Secretary of Labor by the Director of the Office of Emergency Preparedness.
Several important cases under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) were won by the Department this year.
In Shultz v. Employees’ Federation of the Humble Oil and Refining Company, Production Department, South Texas Division, the court held that the federation was a local labor organization subject to the provisions of section 401(b) of the LMRDA, rather than an intermediate body, and was thus required to elect its officers by direct, secret ballot vote of the membership.
Court decisions upholding the exclusive right of the Secretary of Labor to enforce title IV of the LMRDA and confirming his authority with respect to the conduct of supervised elections pursuant to court order were rendered in DeVito v. Shultz, Sħultz v. United Steelworkers of America (two cases), Shultz v. Local 66, Glass Bottle Blowers Association, and Morrissey v. Shultz.
The decision in Shultz v. Local Union 1694, International Longshoremen's Association, upheld the Secretary's right to compel a labor organization to file corrected reports under title II of the act and to obtain an injunction against future violations notwithstanding the defendant's efforts to remedy the violations after the complaint had been filed.
LMRDA, to set aside its 1969 election of international officers, and for injunctive relief to compel the union and its subordinate districts to maintain adequate financial records as required by section 206 of the act.
The Division of Labor-Management Laws helped draft regulations implementing the part of Executive Order 11491 which imposes "standards of conduct" for labor organizations composed of Government employees.
These standards are analogous to those prescribed for labor organizations in the private sector by the LMRDA.
The Division also helped draft the “"Emplovee Benefits Protection Act"(H.R. 16462), which would impose Federal fiduciary standards on privately administered employee welfare and pension plans, andstrengthen the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act.
The proposal would also broaden the investigatory and enforcement authority of the Department, authorize private lawsuits to remedy fiduciary breaches, and bar persons convicted of certain crimes from serving in a fiduciary capacity.
The Division of Labor Relations and Civil Rights this year provided legal services for the Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC) in conducting hearings in Philadelphia, Chicago, Newark, and Washington to gather information to determine what action by OFCC is necessary to insure equal employment opportunities in the construction industry in these locations.
It also supplied legal services required in implementing the OFCC's Revised Philadelphia Plan, which is aimed at insuring equal employment opportunity under Executive Order 11246 in federally involved construction work in the Philadelphia area.
The Division assisted the Department of Justice in defending a suit challenging the validity of the plan.
The district court upheld the plan in Contractors' Association of Eastern Pennsylvania v. Shultz.
The Division also assisted OFCC in establishing the Washington Plan to assure equal employment opportunity in federally involved construction projects in the Washington, D.C., area.
The Division also helped OFCC prepare Order No. 4, which established guidelines and procedures for affirmative action programs for Government contractors, and guidelines on sex discrimination.
Division attorneys participated in numerous compliance reviews of Federal contractors under Executive Order 11246 and of State employment services under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The Division assisted extensively in preparing proposed legislation amending the emergency disputes procedures of the Taft-Hartley Act and the Railway Labor Act.
It also helped prepare regulations under Executive Order 11491, which deals with labor-management relations in the Federal service, and provided extensive legal services to the Assistant Secretary for Labor-Management Relations in the administration of this new Executive order.
Appellate litigation under the Fair Labor Standards and related acts reached a record of 23 favorable court of appeals decisions without a single loss during the fiscal year.
Fourteen of these decisions were reversals of adverse trial court holdings.
The most significant of the decisions rendered were four reversals of adverse district court decisions under the Equal Pay Act.
Specifically, the third and eighth circuits upheld the Secretary's position that the word“egual"does not mean identical and that jobs may be equal where the primary duties are essentially the same, even though men regularly perform incidental and subsidiary tasks which are not performed by women and which may require heavy lifting.
In the eighth circuit case, Shultz v. American Can Company, the court also held that sex-based pay discrimination could not be cured simply by opening up vacancies that might occur in the higher male jobs to women.
In Shultz v. Wheaton Glass Company, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals rejected the contention that men could be paid more for equal work on the ground that they were more useful as a class because of their alleged "flexibility."
The other two reversals established the principle that a training program must be open to both men and women and must provide discernible objective standards in order to qualify under the "factor other than sex" exception to the Equal Pay Act.
After adjustment for the reallocation of functions brought about by the reorganization, the Fair Labor Standards Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act, and related cases instituted in the trial courts substantially exceeded the number of actions filed during the preceding fiscal year.
During the year, a record of 1,842 such cases were instituted, compared with 1,789 in fiscal 1969.
Actions instituted in fiscal 1970 included 78 cases arising under the Equal Pay Act of 1963, some 73 percent more than was projected for the year and another unprecedented number of filings of this type of action.
Some 4,315 women received raises during the year as a result of litigation activity.
Restitution of back wages found due and paid under these statutes likewise increased; $11,038,237 was paid in the current fiscal year, over 55 percent more than the amount recovered in fiscal 1969.
This included $642,103 repaid to 3,830 women under the provisions of the Equal Pay Act as a result of sex-based wage discrimination.
The opinions and interpretations phase of the Division's operations also reflected marked activity.
Several interpretative bulletins were revised, including the bulletin relating to the application of the Fair Labor Standards Act to retailers of goods and services.
Legal activity in the area of administrative procedures included assistance to the Solicitor in his duties as a member of the Administrative Conference of the United States.
This Conference is a continuing body which studies and recommends legal administrative procedures for Federal agencies and which requires the Department's views on many aspects of administrative law and procedure.
The Division of General Legal Services also assisted the Department of Justice regarding litigation against the Secretary of Labor under the public information section of the Administrative Procedure Act (the Freedom of Information Act).
Extensive legal services were rendered under three new statutes— the wage garnishment provisions of the Consumer Credit Protection Act, the construction safety provisions of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, and the "black lung" provisions of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act.
Regulations under the wage garnishment law, including exemption procedures for States with "substantially similar"laws, were prepared, as were orders establishing procedures for issuing safety and health standards.
In addition, preliminary draft regulations under the Mine Safety Act were prepared.
The "black lung" title of the Coal Mine Health and Safety Act provides for cash benefit payments to coal miners totally disabled due to pneumoconiosis arising out of employment in underground coal mines, and to widows of coal miners who died from the disease.
A departmental task force has been working on matters related to implementing the Department's various responsibilities under the act, including development of appropriate standards for judging the adequacy of State workmen's compensation laws.
A record high of 38 administrative enforcement proceedings were instituted under the Service Contract Act and 29 under the Public Contracts Act.
Twenty-six of these 67 cases involved safety and health violations.
Amendments were issued to various regulations under the Fair Labor Standards Act, including regulations dealing with hazardous occupations in agriculture.
Litigation assistance increased in the area of veterans' reemployment rights; 108 claims were referred to the Department of Justice last year for possible prosecution.
The Division provided assistance to agencies charged with implementing a Presidential directive on combating construction inflation and meeting other construction needs.
Working with the contracting agencies, steps were taken to improve employment and training opportunities of Federal and federally assisted construction projects, particularly for the disadvantaged in the ghetto areas.
In cooperation with the Manpower Administration and the Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission, administrative action was taken to broaden opportunities generally for employment in apprentice training programs on these projects.
Decisions of the Bureau of Employees' Compensation on claims under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act were defended before the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board in 167 appeals.
One of the more noteworthy cases authorized payment of moving expenses when an employee's physician determined that a change of climate was necessitated by an employment-related injury.
Recoveries in third-party actions brought by 1,552 injured Federal employees totaled $7,936,977.96.
Direct refunds to the Government came to $1,037,143.84, with additional savings in medical costs of $184,744.86.
Under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, 39 briefs were prepared in support of defensive pleadings filed on behalf of deputy commissioners as defendants in actions involving judicial review of their compensation orders.
Continued success was achieved in litigation under the act: out of 65 decisions in cases submitted for judicial review—including three Supreme Court decisions and nine courts of appeals decisions—the Department's position was sustained in 60.
In a landmark decision involving three consolidated appeals, the Supreme Court held that injuries to longshoremen working on wharves and piers ("dockside") are not covered under the Longshoremen's Act and are subject only to State workmen's compensation laws.
Also under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, legal services were furnished to the Bureau of Labor Standards in its enforcement of the maritime safety program under that law.
In the area of international labor affairs, the Division helped prepare and review materials relating to the criteria and administration of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 provisions for certification eligibility of workers to apply for adjustment assistance where adversely affected by competitive imports.
This included the review of the first certifications of eligibility of groups of workers to be issued since the passage of the act.
In response to intense interest in prices, unemployement, wages, productivity, and other indicators of the economy's behavior, the Bureau of Labor Statisties introduced numerous improvements in the timeliness, quality, and usefulness of its data.
The time between collection and release of statistics was substantially reduced.
The speedup was accomplished by more effective use of computers and changes in data processing procedures.
Results of new statistical programs were made available, and several major analytical studies were published.
The Bureau completed a major program to update its economic projections to 1980.
The gross national product, along with its distribution into personal consumption expenditures, gross private domestic investment, net foreign demand, and government expenditures, was projected to 1980.
This was done for the entire economy, as well as for 82 industries.
Input-output coefficients for 1980 were developed, and the rate of growth of output and employment for each industry was projected.
The Bureau's projections also included detailed estimates of occupational requirements for close to 250 occupations for use in vocational guidance and manpower and educational training.
Detailed industry projections to 1980, covering wage and salary workers, were developed for approximately 250 industries, as were projections of employment by industry and occupation.
These projections were designed to aid State and area economists in developing their own occupational estimates, following methods suggested in the Bureau's earlier publication "Tomorrow's Manpower Needs."
In addition, projections of the labor force to 1985 by age, sex, race, and educational attainment were made.
The U.S. Economy in 1980," a bulletin combining all the BLS economic projections for the coming decade, was published.
The array of price data published was expanded to include seasonally adjusted indexes and annualized rates of change for various time periods.
Specifications were revised in both the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and Wholesale Price Index (WPI) to reflect changes in the characteristies of goods and services flowing to the marketplace.
The coverage of price indexes was expanded in the important areas of special industrial machinery and plastic products.
A major project was undertaken to improve upon methods currently used to compare rents and house prices over time.
Pilot testing of a comprehensive housing unit survey and a consumer expenditure survey were begun in two metropolitan areas.
The data from these surveys will be used for living conditions studies, as well as for the revision of the CPI.
The conceptual basis of a cost index, frequently needed for price escalation purposes, was developed and used to estimate changes in the operating costs for non-rent-controlled apartment houses in New York City.
The cooperative Federal-State program on job openings and labor turnover statisties resulted in the first release of regular statisties on job vacancies.
The information covered the level and rate of job vacancies in total manufacturing and in durable and nondurable goods and selected industries for the period March 1969 to May 1970.
These statisties are now being released monthly for the Nation as a whole and for 25 areas.
Data from a survey concerning employment problems of povertyarea residents of six large U.S. cities were released for the first time in the "Manpower Report of the President," as well as in a series of reports by the BLS national and regional offices.
Labor force data were expanded to include for the first time seasonally adjusted data on unemployment by reason—whether the unemployed lost their last jobs, left them, or were entrants to the labor force—and on the full- and part-time status of the labor force.
A report, "Employment in Perspective: An Examination of Recent Developments in the Labor Force, Employment and Unemployment," was released.
Publication of monthly data on hours and earnings of nonsupervisory workers in transportation, public utilities, and services was initiated.
The 1970–71 edition of the "Occupational Outlook Handbook" was issued.
This publication provides a variety of occupational information for use in guiding youth toward career goals.
It describes the nature of work, education and training requirements, employment outlook, places of employment, and earnings and working conditions for over 700 occupations that cover the entire scope of work life.
With BLS assistance, considerable progress was made in implementing at the State level the manpower projection procedures outlined in the Bureau's publication “Tomorrow's Manpower Needs.
Over 30 States have adopted this program and 14 States have completed and published industrial and occupational employment projections.
A report presenting the supply-demand analysis for 20 professional occupations of college-trained personnel was submitted to the Subcommittee on Higher Education of the House Committee on Education and will be published by the Committee and the BLS.
The Bureau prepared a graphie factbook on trends in productivity in relation to economie stability for use by the Secretary in discussions with the President, the Cabinet, and the National Commission on Productivity.
New indexes of output per man-hour, together with analysis of some factors affecting trends, were prepared for several individual industries, including gray iron foundries, paper boxes, sugar, and household appliances.
As part of the continuing effort to assess the manpower implications of technological change, a study of computer control of industrial processes was completed.
Input-output techniques were used to analyze the impact of defense expenditures on direct and indirect employment on an industry-byindustry basis.
Similar analyses were developed on the employment impact of foreign trade.
The first survey of hours of work and hourly earnings of noninstructional employees in educational institutions was completed.
The study aided in assessing the effect of extension of the Fair Labor Standards Act to these employees.
The first surveys of occupational wages in municipal government were inaugurated by studving eight cities in different regions of the country.
A file of collective bargaining agreements covering State and local government employees was started.
Another program of studies was begun covering such areas as impasse and arbitration procedures, union security arrangements, and union membership among government employees.
Work was completed on a project to code all union contracts covering 5,000 or more workers for some 100 agreement provisions, making available a continuous cross-section analysis of collective bargaining agreements.
An econometric model was developed to aid in the analysis of the relationships between wages, prices, unemployment, and profits.
A comprehensive analysis of the relationship between minimum wage laws and youth unemployment was published.
The analysis included separate studies evaluating past experience under the national minimum, employer hiring standards, problems of placing youths, wage expectations of youths, the relationship between teenage earnings and family income, and experience with differential minimum wage rates for youth under Federal and State law.
Experience in Western Europe, Canada, and Japan was also studied.
Labor Law and Practice" reports for Iceland, Japan, and Belgium were published.
Other completed reports on foreign countries were an analysis of the Arab labor force in the Israeli occupied territories, a trade union directory for Japan, and general manpower studies for Libya, South Korea, Peru, Tanzania, Laos, Nicaragua, Dahomey, Netherlands, Poland, Costa Rica, Ceylon, Iran, and Sudan.
Work was commenced as part of a government-wide program on a compendium of social statisties that may be useful in measuring the social welfare of those not participating fully in the Nation's economic well-being.
The Monthly Labor Review increased its efforts to present significant economic data in attractive, readable form, while continuing its reports on research performed in the BLS and other economic arenas.
In April 1970, a 31-page feature on “The U.S. Economy in 1980" provided a preview of the BLS projections on the labor force, economic growth, and the shape of employment by industry and occupation. A major share of the June 1970 issue was devoted to"Women at Work," using the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the Women's Bureau for an indepth look at the situation of the working woman today and her prospects in coming years.
A preview of the 1970 Census appeared in the December 1969 issue.
The “Handbook of Labor Statisties 1969" was published.
The 407- page book makes available in one volume the major series produced by the BLS.
In general, each table is complete historically.
Related series from other governmental agencies and foreign countries are also included.
BLS cosponsored with several Texas agencies the 28th North American Conference on Labor Statisties which had as a theme “The Role of Labor Statistics in the Quality of Life.
The 350 delegates included administrators, statisticians, and economists of State, Provincial, and Federal departments of labor, educational institutions, labor organizations, and business firms.
Enforcement of Federal laws regulating union elections, veterans' reemployment rights, union activity, and employee welfare and pension plan disclosures is the responsibility of the Labor-Management Services Administration (LMSA).
This Administration also strives to help both employers and workers improve the Nation's free collective bargaining system.
In fiscal 1970, LMSA took on broad new responsibilities in Federal employee-management relations under Executive Order 11491.
A reorganization of LMSA during the year consolidated many field functions in six regional and 24 area offices, added new staff, and provided improved services in all areas of responsibility.
During the fiscal year, the Federal Government continued its policy of encouraging resolution of collective bargaining disputes in the private sector of the economy with a minimum of Federal participation.
This policy was evident in a number of major disputes in such key industries as electrical products, trucking, airlines, and railroads.
Federal action was necessary, however, to avert a threatened nationwide railroad stoppage when the carriers and four shopcraft unions were unable to reach final agreement on new contract terms.
Although exhaustive mediatory efforts produced an agreement, rejection of terms by one of the unions killed a settlement.
Congress then passed an Administration-sponsored bill which resolved the impasse by putting into effect the terms of the tentative settlement earlier agreed to by the negotiators.
LMSA's “early warning” system continued to alert the Secretary to impending labor-management disputes in key industries and to keep him and other officials informed of developments in major collective bargaining situations.
Regular reports were submitted covering critical labor-management relationships and significant contract expirations.
Special and supplementary status reports also were issued on the background and progress of key negotiations in such industries as electrical products, rubber, trucking, and railroads.
Staff assistance was provided to a Presidential Emergency Board established under the Railway Labor Act in the dispute involving the Nation's railroads and 48,000 shopcraft employees represented by four railroad labor organizations.
It was also provided to a special mediator appointed by the Secretary to help the Nation's railroads and the United Transportation Union resolve the longstanding fireman-manning dispute.
At the request of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the Department monitored the ratification procedure in the membership vote on the National Master Freight Agreement.
The Department was responsible for the planning and implementation of procedures for accumulating, sorting, and counting the more than 200,000 ballots and for verifying the final results of the count.
The count was conducted by a private firm, but the conduct of the vote was supervised by Department employees from the time the ballots were received at the Washington, D.C., post office until they were counted and the final tabulation verified.
A special study of railway conductors’ road freight trips was completed and transmitted to the National Railway Labor Conference, representing the Nation's carriers, and the United Transportation Union, representing railway conductors.
The study was undertaken at the request of the parties in conformity with the terms of their mediation agreement which averted a nationwide railroad strike.
The report presented factual material for use by the parties in future negotiations.
The Secretary is responsible under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964 for protecting the interests of transportation industry employees affected by federally assisted programs for improving bus, rail, and rapid transit systems.
The Secretary must certify that working and employment conditions shall not be adversely affected as a result of programs assisted by the Department of Transportation.
The number of applications has continued to increase since the statute was enacted.
During 1970, certifications were made on 78 applications, having a total project cost of more than $408,577,000.
There was another sharp quantitative increase during fiscal year 1970 in the Department's responsibilities to veterans, reservists, national guardsmen, and others having statutory reemployment rights under the Military Selective Service Act of 1967.
Continuing the trend of the three previous fiscal years, the number of complaint cases filed grew from 3,946 in fiscal 1969 to 4,852 in fiscal 1970, a 23 percent increase.
The 1970 figure was 58 percent greater than the one for fiscal 1968, when 3,066 complaint cases were received.
Part of this increased case load is attributed to the greater number of local LMSA offices able to handle this type of work.
The number of these offices increased this year from 11 to 36 due to the Administration's reorganization.
Undoubtedly this increase also resulted from an estimated 17 percent rise in separations from the Armed Forces, from some 942,000 during fiscal 1969 to an estimated 1.1 million during fiscal 1970.
Approximately 70 percent of the new veterans participated in the referral procedure established in cooperation with the Department of Defense.
Each participating veteran was sent basic information about reemployment rights assistance and other services available to veterans through the Department of Labor.
About 50 percent of these veterans indicated preservice employers, who were advised through this procedure of the basic provisions of the reemployment rights law.
As a result, many veterans were reinstated in their jobs without further action by the Office of Veterans' Reemployment Rights.
The complaint case backlog increased by 45 percent during the fiscal year, reaching a total of 1,631 on June 30, 1970, as compared with 1,123 at the end of fiscal 1969.
As previously, copies of the referral forms received by the Office of Veterans' Reemployment Rights were made available to the Manpower Administration's Veterans Employment Service (VES).
The VES offers assistance to veterans in locating new employment in those cases where the veteran did not have or did not choose to exercise reemployment rights with a preservice employer.
In October 1969, President Nixon issued Executive Order 11491, replacing Executive Order 10988.
The new order, which became effective January 1, 1970, established a new program for labor-management relations in the Federal Government.
To administer the program, the order established a central authority consisting of a Federal Labor Relations Council (FLRC) and a Federal Service Impasses Panel, as well as new functions for the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Labor-Management Relations.
The Assistant Secretary has responsibility for supervising representation elections, deciding unit determination disputes, as well as cases involving alleged unfair labor practices and standards of conduct violations.
He also decides eligibility questions on national consultation rights under the criteria prescribed by the FLRC.
Since issuance of the Assistant Secretary's regulations on February 4, 1970, 940 cases involving both representation and unfair labor practices were initiated in the various LMSA field offices.
During this period, LMSA supervised 284 representation elections.
In fiscal year 1970, Government employees' labor organizations continued to expand their membership.
As of November 1969, 54 percent of the approximately 3 million employees of the Federal executive branch were represented by labor organizations having exclusive recognition.
Employee units with exclusive recognition increased from 2,300 as of the last report to 2,647 in 35 agencies of the Government.
Administration of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) and the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act (WPPDA) progressed satisfactorily in 1970.
By the end of the 1970 fiscal year, the Department had on file reports from 50,968 active reporting labor organizations.
Approximately 3,450 investigations were completed under the LMRDA.
Forty-five civil actions involving the Department were instituted under the act in Federal distriet courts.
Seventy-four individuals were charged with criminal violations of the LMRDA in indictments or criminal informations filed in Federal district courts; 47 persons, including some who had previously been indicted, were convicted, and 3 were acquitted.
The indictments against 16 others were dismissed.
Approximately 171,600 active employee-benefit plans were on file with the Department under the WPPDA as of June 30, 1970.
Of these, about 33,700 were retirement plans.
About 650 delinquent or deficient reporting investigations were completed.
Bills concerning welfare and pension plans sponsored by the Department in the 90th Congress were reintroduced by additional congressional sponsors in the 91st Congress.
A bill entitled “The Employee Benefits Protection Act," which was the subject of a Presidential message to the Congress on March 13, 1970, was introduced for the Administration on that date.
It would amend the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act in four major areas: (1) The Federal Government would require that persons who control employee benefit funds must deal with those funds exclusively in the interest of the emplovees/beneficiaries under a Federal standard of fiduciary responsibility; (2) the reporting and disclosure provisions would be broadened and strengthened by requirements calling for additional information; (3) changes would be made to implement the newly imposed management responsibility and the newly strengthened reporting provisions, including broadened investigatory and enforcement powers for the Secretary of Labor; and (4) the act would foster a body of uniform Federal law in employee benefit protection.
The Secretary of Labor testified during one of 17 days of hearings held on these bills by the General Subcommittee on Labor of the House of Representatives.
Regulations (29 CFR 204), implementing section 18 of Executive Order 11491, relating to standards of conduct of labor organizations subject to the order, were drafted and issued with various accompanying report forms and their instructions.
A long-term program of research and data collection in the area of State and local government labor relations was instituted in 1970.
The Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics participates in this program as the principal research agency under contract.
The program is designed to provide the parties engaged in labor relations and the public with the kinds of information needed to encourage and support responsible collective bargaining relationships.
In preparation for this project, the Office of Labor-Management Policy Development (LMPD) undertook a study of the research needs of State and local authorities and the organizations with which they deal.
It also participated in a departmental study of labor relations in the public sector and the role of the Federal Government.
Also initiated during fiscal 1970 was a research program covering the problem of strikes and other forms of industrial conflict.
A longterm program was developed, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics was selected as a key research resource, especially regarding studies involving data collection.
During the year, LMPD participated in joint undertakings relating to a study of the impact of three major longshore strikes in which emergency dispute provisions of the Taft-Hartley Act were invoked, and to the development of a new Administration proposal dealing with transportation strikes threatening to imperil the Nation's health or safety.
Other major research projects completed or started during the year included (1) a study of union work referral systems in the construction industry, (2) a study of apprenticeships and admission requirements of building trades unions, (3) a statistical analysis of trusteeships reported by building trades unions under the LMRDA, (4) a study of benefit plans operated by national unions, (5) an analysis of the rights of retired union members, and (6) a study of administrative expenses of welfare and pension plans.
Responsibility for continuing research on the problem of seasonality in the construction industry was transferred to this office in mid-year.
Litigation assistance was lent to the Solicitor's Office and to the Justice Department in cases arising out of the LMRDA.
An analysis of union rules on meeting attendance, as a qualification for union office, was undertaken as part of this assistance.
LMPD also participated in serving international agencies such as the International Labor Organization and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, including some pioneering efforts toward interesting the OECD in industrial relations problems.
The Office of Policy, Evaluation, and Research, which is headed by an Assistant Secretary, stimulates and coordinates research and evaluation efforts for the Department and provides it with policy guidance and program development services.
A number of special studies undertaken in the Office of Policy Development have illuminated new issues and problems facing our society and have paved the way to constructive responses.
New concepts have been developed in the rehabilitation of criminals through manpower training.
A booklet, "U.S. Manpower in the 1970's: Opportunity and Challenge," was being developed to inform the public about basic trends in the nature and scale of tomorrow's labor market.
Another of the Office's principal activities was its representation of the Department in the development and presentation of the forwardlooking Family Assistance Plan, which is designed to put a floor under the earnings of all American families and to move people off welfare into productive jobs.
Much staff work was done in providing support to the Secretary and the Assistant Secretary in their representation of the Department on domestic council committees and interdepartmental task forces covering such topics as education, the elderly, national growth, new communities, children and youth, and the blue-collar worker.
A study done on the latter group highlights the economic, workplace, and social pressures affecting lower middle income workers and has engendered a wide range of interest and attention.
The Assistant Secretary and his staff took the lead in gaining adoption of a forward-planning process which determines key issues facing the Department, analyzes various policy and program alternatives, and insures that the results of these analyses are reflected in the annual budget.
The Office also serves as staff to the Secretary in coordinating this process through to the point of budget execution.
The Office of Evaluation was active in many areas.
In early January, a "Report on Evaluation Activities Within the Department" was completed and presented to the executive staff of the Department.
This report summarized evaluation plans of administrations and offices for the current and coming year, and laid out a conceptual framework by which gaps in the Department's overall evaluation program could be readily identified.
This framework also classified the major goals and functions of the Department's major components in a way which illustrated the nature of the methodological problems in evaluating various programs.
Technical assistance in the evaluation area was provided to major departmental units for a variety of evaluation issues.
Although the Office did not have funds of its own during fiscal year 1970 for contractor evaluations, it was instrumental in bringing about the execution of several contracts, such as a special programing, tabulation, and analysis of manpower participant records, and the development of an econometric model which will show the impact of manpower policies under the proposed Family Assistance Plan on the target population for that program.
To assure that the extensive research and development activities of the Department focus on problem areas of major poliey concern and are effectively coordinated, the Secretary of Labor appointed a Research Policy Committee under the chairmanship of the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Policy, Evaluation, and Research.
The committee is responsible for identifying Department of Labor research priorities, developing coordinated research plans for major research programs of departmental interest, and establishing procedures for more effective dissemination and utilization of research findings.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs has responsibility for the Department's wide range of international labor activities, which during fiscal year 1970 continued to grow.
In the first part of the year, the Department was official host to delegations from 22 nations in the Western Hemisphere who came to the United States for the Third Inter-American Conference of Labor Ministers.
The Secretary of Labor was a principal speaker at this conference.
In tariff and trade matters, the Department played an active role in the development of the Administration's proposed new Trade Act.
Of particular concern to the Department were revisions in the act affecting the trade adjustment assistance program, which aids workers dislocated by increased foreign imports.
This year, approximately 2,200 workers became eligible for this type of assistance.
Adjustment assistance can be rendered in various forms: new skill training, employment counseling, and relocating of workers to geographical areas where their skills are needed.
In addition, an early warning system is being developed for workers facing possible job loss from imports.
The Long-Term Arrangement on cotton textiles was extended until 1973 and 13 bilateral agreements, three of them new, were reached.
The Department of Labor International Technical Assistance Corps expanded its activities during the year with 48 overseas technical assistance assignments in 24 different countries.
During the year, training and cultural programs in the labor and manpower fields were arranged in the United States for 491 foreign nationals, most of whom were visiting under the sponsorship of the Agency for International Development.
More than 700,000 persons in Latin America and Africa viewed exhibits on U.S. workers which were presented there by the Department.
Participation by the Department continued in the International Labor Organization and other United Nations bodies, as well as in the Manpower and Social Affairs Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
The Assistant Secretary of Labor for Labor-Management Relations was elected Chairman of the Working Party on Labor-Management Relations of the OECD.
Other activities kept the Department deeply involved in the various aspects of the international labor scene.
It participated in: State Department task forces on U.S. foreign affairs; the seventh meeting of the United States-Japan Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs in Tokyo; the conference of labor attaches from the Near East and South Asia and Pacifie held in New Delhi, India; and the organization of the first union-management-government international symposium on containerization in the maritime and longshore industry, at which 27 countries were represented.
The Secretary of Labor served as chairman of the Symposium's Advisory Council at the latter conference.
The Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, a three-member quasi-judicial appellate body, has exclusive jurisdiction to consider and decide appeals from decisions in claims arising under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act involving work-connected injuries and diseases.
The Board began the fiscal year with 65 cases.
During the year, 153 new appeals were docketed and 171 cases were closed, leaving 47 pending cases at the end of the year.
The average time lapse from the date of filing an appeal to the date of closing was 4.8 months.
Information activities designed to keep the public informed of the Department's broad-gauged services and activities added up to a diversified program in 1970.
This program was carried out through the use of a wide array of media—from leaflets, magazines, and news releases to national campaigns utilizing radio, television, and magazines.
In all these activities, the principal aim was to tell the American public precisely what the Department was doing to advance the interests of workers and the jobless who want to work.
Moreover, the Department continued to publish periodically vital data covering such subjects as employment and unemployment, earnings, prices, productivity, and work stoppages.
The 1970 information program was highlighted by stepped-up activities to make more effective use of radio and television and to reach special groups of citizens with special problems.
The electronic media figured more importantly than ever in promoting youth opportunities and in explaining workers' rights under the Federal wage-hour, equal pay, and age discrimination in employment laws.
Efforts to reach minorities and other disadvantaged citizens picked up momentum.
For instance, more than 200 minority radio stations were fed, on a continuing basis, news of special interest to minorities and recordings by popular entertainers urging young people to continue their education.
Two films on manpower training opportunities for American Indians were made.
People-to-people information activities formed a key element in efforts to get the Department's message across to the public.
The Secretary and other top-ranking officials made speeches and held press conferences across the Nation.
And other representatives of the agency, specialists in certain areas, spoke and made presentations before countless labor, business, civic, professional, and educational groups.
Hundreds of news releases, detailing in timely fashion events and information of interest to the public, were prepared and distributed.
Weekly press packets aimed at millions of union members, residents of small towns and rural areas and minority group members, were distributed to more than 3,600 newspapers and magazines.
Department employees in Washington, D.C., and in field offices across the country answered hundreds of thousands of inquiries and requests for information by telephone and by mail.
These requests came from Americans in all walks of life and from interested persons and groups from abroad.
To keep its own employees abreast of the latest developments in the Department, a biweekly newsletter, the USDL Forum, was started in fiscal 1970.