At a time when Americans of all ages and from all walks of life were expressing heightened concern over the quality of our total environment, increased attention was given in fiscal 1971 to improving the American working environment.
The U.S. Department of Labor figured importantly in these efforts to enhance the quality of the world of work.
It was a year in which efforts were stepped up to alleviate the problems of working men and women as the Nation sought to curb inflation and make the transition from a wartime to a peacetime economy.
The country's workplaces, where Americans spend so great a share of their lives, are a huge component of the total environment.
Pollution of job environment, whether it is physical or psychological, can be as stifling as the fouling of our air and our waters.
This Department recognizes that cleaning up America's places of work, in all senses, comes squarely within its province.
To this end, we took numerous actions of significance to working men and women.
Armed with new authority, we massively expanded our activities in safeguarding the health and safety of the Nation's workers.
We brought new programs into being to cope with unemployment and worked with the rest of the administration in its battle against inflation.
We continued our effort, strengthened by organizational improvements, to eliminate all types of wage discrimination and labor exploitation, resorting to the courts when necessary.
We helped work out a proposed legislative amendment providing for a minimum-wage differential for young persons designed to make it easier for them to find jobs.
We expanded our drive to decentralize our functions and to make our programs more responsive to the needs of the people.
We intensified efforts to aid veterans and others adversely affected by economic changes brought about by the winddown of the Vietnam War.
We set in motion activities designed to give greater aid to migrant farm workers.
We were involved in efforts to resolve several major labor-management disputes threatening the general welfare.
We deligently pursued the achievement of the longstanding goal of equal employment opportunity.
We expanded our already broad program for collecting and disseminating socioeconomic data.
We further systematized our research activities.
We continued to play an active role in the field of international labor.
Some of these actions could not have been accomplished without new laws passed by the Congress and signed by a President who places high priority on improving the quality of working life in America.
A prime example was the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, which the President signed on December 29.
With that stroke of the Chief Executive's pen, an event of momentous meaning to the working people of the United States, the job safety and health of some 57 million workers in more than 4 million establishments were made a responsibility of the Federal Government.
The salutary effect of a Federal presence in the field of safety and health has been convincingly demonstrated by the safety records of such industries as longshoring and shipbuilding, where the Government has had jurisdiction for some years.
The Williams-Steiger Act took effect on April 28, 1971, and on that date the Department was ready to carry out its new duties.
A whole new component of the Department, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), was by then a going concern.
A good many safety inspectors had already been trained, and more were completing their training courses at a steady pace.
Administrative machinery was in place.
Safety and health standards were being developed and readied for implementation.
In line with the President's desire for more decentralization, I gave maximum responsibility to regional and area personnel.
Two-thirds of OSHA's people were to be assigned to field locations.
This emphasis on bringing programs closer to the people being served was a consistent thread running through all operations of the Department.
This purposeful trend was nowhere more evident than in the Department's extensive manpower programs, which continued to train the unskilled, open job opportunities for youth and the disadvantaged, and find work for the unemployed.
The Manpower Administration delegated additional responsibility for many operational functions to its 10 regional administrators and the District of Columbia manpower administrator.
The U.S. Training and Employment Service was reorganized to provide better coordination of the functions supporting manpower delivery systems.
We worked closely with other Federal and volunteer agencies in an intensive effort to find employment for the increasing flood of discharged military veterans.
The Department was a major participant in the President's Jobs for Veterans campaign and offered top-priority training and employment services to veterans.
We also started a program to assist another group, whose work opportunities were affected adversely by the movement toward a peacetime economy.
These were aerospace and defense engineers, scientists, and technicians, whose jobs were disappearing along with many defense-related contracts for their employers.
Special programs were created to find other jobs for those who had been laid off, to train them in new but related skills, and to help them relocate if necessary.
We made a significant move just before the end of the fiscal year in our effort to improve conditions for migrant farm workers.
The Department set up a long-range, comprehensive manpower program for this historically exploited segment of our population.
As a result, more than 6,000 migrants will receive direct manpower services, including job training, during fiscal 1972.
Economic security and yearround employment are the goals.
The Department helped shape a proposed Manpower Revenue Sharing Act which would give local officials more funds and more authority to cope with their manpower problems with minimal direction from Washington.
Another legislative proposal of the administration, and one which would give this Department tremendous new responsibilities, was the Welfare Reform Act.
This measure would provide new manpower services, including at least 200,000 transitional public service jobs, for welfare recipients.
The DOL would administer the opportunities for families program, serving families with at least one employable member, and providing incentive allowances, child care and other supportive services to help participants prepare for employment.
Special groups were formed within the Department to plan in advance against the day of enactment of this measure.
We prepared specifications for amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act and supported the amendments with testimony at congressional hearings.
Important among these proposals is a special minimum wage for young people, allowing them a differential deemed necessary to open up job opportunities for youth.
Under this proposal, the minimum wage for persons under 18, for full-time students 18 and 19 years old, and for 18- and 19-year-old job starters in the first 6 months of their first jobs would be $1.60 an hour.
For most other workers, it would rise to $2 (from the present $1.60) by 1974.
We joined with other executive departments in contributing to the development of details of the President's plan for reorganization of the executive branch.
The plan would consolidate seven existing Cabinet departments, including Labor, into four.
Another major law, the Emergency Employment Act of 1971, was on the verge of final approval.
This act, to be administered by the Secretary of Labor, would authorize the expenditure of $2.25 billion in 2 years to put more than 150,000 jobless persons to work in transitional public service jobs.
The fruits of these initiatives were in the future, but many of the Nation's unemployed already were benefitting from a proposal that became law in August 1970, the Employment Security Amendments of 1970.
This act extended the protection of unemployment insurance to about 5 million additional persons, strengthened the program's financial base, and provided the first permanent mechanism for extending the duration of benefits during periods of high unemployment.
A significant tool in the battle against inflation was the Construction Industry Stabilization Committee, in whose work we were active.
This group achieved substantial moderation of the levels of wage increases -which had been prevailing in the construction industry.
The number of strikes in the construction trades also was reduced substantially.
High in priority among my concerns were our programs to assure equal employment opportunity and the elimination of discrimination against minority groups, women, youth, and older workers.
The Philadelphia Plan, imposed by the Department of Labor on a five-county Philadelphia area, was strategic in this effort.
The plan requires bidders on federally involved construction work to submit affirmative-action plans setting percentage ranges for utilizing minorities in half a dozen skilled trades.
It utilizes numerical goals and timetables.
On-site reviews showed the plan generally was running ahead of its goals.
However, we prefer to rely more on voluntary, “hometown" plans than on federally imposed arrangements in our effort to widen minority job opportunities in construction erafts.
By year's end, there were 27 hometown plans in existence, while this Department had imposed four and a court had imposed one.
The Third U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, in a decision highly important to our effort, ruled that the Philadelphia Plan's affirmativeaction concept, including the use of numerical goals and timetables, is constitutional.
The number of contract-compliance reviews, which totaled many thousands, was inereased greatly.
Appropriate steps to bring contractors into compliance were taken where reviews disclosed deficiencies.
Within the Department, I set up a task force in March 1971, to study the ageney's own equal employment opportunity program and make recommendations for strengthening it.
As the year ended, this study was nearing completion.
I am determined that the Department of Labor shall be a model of aggressive achievement in the area of equal employment opportunity.
The Department had an extremely busy year enforcing such laws as those providing for minimum wages, overtime pay, and restrictions on child labor and those prohibiting job and wage discrimination for reasons of age or sex.
For example, more than 65,000 investigations were made in an effort to correct substandard working conditions in many types of establishments.
Child labor findings increased greatly, due in part to scheduling of retail and service establishments not previously investigated.
Workers were found to have been underpaid by scores of millions of dollars through violations of statutory wage standards, including those requiring elimination of wage discrimination against women.
Besides bringing action to end numerous instances of wage discrimination against women, the Department carried on an active program to broaden employment opportunities for women.
These services extended to minority groups.
The Department maintained its principle of minimal Federal intrusion into collective bargaining disputes between private parties, but some cases of intervention were necessitated by the emergency nature of the disagreements and significant involvement of the publie welfare.
These cases, involving management and unions in the railroad and lóngshore industries and the U.S. Postal Service, required the participation in mediation sessions of the Department's top officials.
In one railroad dispute, Congress was obliged to intervene with emergency short-run legislation.
In this regard, the administration has before the Congress an Emergency Public Interest Protection Act, which would give the President vital new authority for dealing with national emergency labor disputes in the railroad, airline, maritime, longshore, and trucking industries.
We believe this is an excellent bill because, while it provides the means to deal with emergency transportation disputes, its primary thrust is to encourage settlements by the parties themselves.
This would be a boon for free collective bargaining.
The Department of Labor long has been a primary source of information on unemployment, the labor force, prices, wages, and various economic indicators.
We devised methods during the year to speed up the reporting of basic emplovment and unemployment statistics.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics strengthened many of its surveys and introduced new ones.
It also published numerous special studies on subjects in the labor and economic fields, in which more data clearly were needed to deal with contemporary problems.
We dealt with many problems in fiscal 1971, and I know we face numerous challenges in 1972 and the years ahead.
Some will be familiar and some will be new, doubtless including some we cannot foresee.
We will intensify our efforts to cope with unemployment and inflation.
Veterans and other groups with special problems in finding jobs and meeting the cost of living deserve all the help they can get.
I am resolved that this Department shall do its utmost to provide such aid.
We will expand, to a substantial degree, our capabilities of assuring safe and healthful workplaces.
At the same time we will continue to oversee wage and labor standards laid down by law.
I will continue to lay heavy emphasis in the Department on training and otherwise assisting the young and the disadvantaged and on eradicating all types of discrimination in employment.
We look forward to the new responsibilities we will be given with final approval of proposed legislation.
Some of this legislation, as I have mentioned, already was before the Congress as the year ended.
We were ready to swing immediately into administration of the Emergency Employment Act, whose enactment was imminent, and were planning carefully to assume the large new responsibilities we would receive with approval of the Welfare Reform Act and the Manpower Revenue Sharing Act.
We also were planning ahead to be ready to move smoothly into place in a reorganized executive branch.
Based on the record of 1971, I anticipate a busy, constructive 1972, during which the Department of Labor will continue to strive to be a leader in the effort to improve the quality of the American working life.
Significant increases in training opportunities and other services for jobless and underemploved workers and special efforts to meet the employment needs of veterans, engineers, and scientists affected by the shift toward a peacetime economy highlighted Manpower Administration activities during fiscal year 1971.
Plans were advanced to place funds and authority to shape and operate manpower programs at the levels of government closest to the people and best able to respond to their needs.
A proposed major overhaul of the Nation's welfare system—setting a new direction for its dependent families—and a transitional public employment measure close to enactment at year's end brought the prospect of new functions for the Manpower Administration.
The unemployment insurance system was strengthened significantly by new legislation, which, along with other improvements, extended coverage to nearly 5 million additional jobs.
Two major pieces of legislation affecting manpower services—the Manpower Revenue Sharing Act and the Welfare Reform Act— were proposed by the President during the year.
By year's end, both were under active consideration by the Congress.
In addition, congressional consideration of the Emergency Employment Act of 1971 had been completed.
This measure, after receiving Presidential approval, would give the Secretary of Labor a means of responding quickly to the unemployment situation by providing more than 150,- 000 new jobs for the Nation's jobless and underemployed workers.
Passage of the Manpower Revenue Sharing Act would greatly improve Manpower Administration activities by permitting decategorization of many manpower programs and a greater degree of decentralization and local decisionmaking.
It would give State and city officials both the money and the authority to deal with local manpower problems.
The second legislative proposal that would improve the Nation's manpower situation is the welfare reform measure.
In addition to placing a floor under the incomes of poor families, it would provide new manpower services, including transitional public service jobs, for welfare recipients.
The Department of Labor would be responsible for administering the opportunities for families program, which would serve families with at least one employable member.
The Secretary of Labor would provide incentive allowances, child care, and other supportive services to help participants prepare for employment.
The welfare reform measure was passed by the House of Representatives in June 1971.
In anticipation of the major role assigned to the Department of Labor in the bill, the Department established, in April 1971, a Welfare Reform Policy Committee headed by the Under Secretary.
The Manpower Administration continued its efforts to decentralize responsibilities for achieving major manpower goals.
It strengthened its regional office capability by consolidating functions and staff of 17 Manpower Administration area offices and eight Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training area offices.
The 10 Regional Manpower administrators and the District of Columbia Manpower administrator were delegated additional responsibility to finance manpower programs; they were given responsibility for assigning the allocation of funds, controlling obligating actions, and reporting financial activities.
The regional offices have been delegated authority to review and to approve rental-purchase proposals for acquisition of office space or building sites and to administer Manpower Administration fiscal standards.
The regions were also made responsible for fiscal action on supplemental budget requests from State employment service agencies.
In addition, the regional manpower administrators were given full responsibility for closing out contracts.
The authorization for payment of monthly invoices under the approximately 10,000 manpower contracts was being completely decentralized during the fiscal year.
Data systems were reoriented toward supporting the decentralization of program management to the regional offices.
A series of Management Information reports focuses on regional activity; it provides summaries and analyses of basic workload statistics.
The special review staff conducted training sessions in all regions in order to increase the regions' capabilities in matters of contract monitoring and investigation of management problems.
The Federal-State network of over 2,300 local employment service offices received nearly 10 million new applications for jobs and made 3.6 million nonagricultural and 3.3 million agricultural placements.
Jobseekers were given counseling, referral to jobs or training, and/or supportive services, with special attention given to the disadvantaged.
Trainees were recruited and selected for the Job Opportunities in the Business Sector (JOBS) program, Job Corps, work-experience programs such as Neighborhood Youth Corps (NYC) and Operation Mainstream, and for MDTA training.
Some 4,526 prison inmates received training.
In addition, eight pretrial intervention projects to substitute manpower services and counseling for formal adjudication were designed to serve about 4,000 accused offenders in the near future.
Also, models for manpower seryices before, during, and after incarceration were being developed in nine States.
Funding for all these programs within the manpower correctional area totaled $13.7 million.
Operation Mainstream helped over 20,000 adults obtain full-time employment in conservation, beautification, and community services.
Ás of May 31, 1971, the Public Service Careers program was training 10,332 disadvantaged persons in local governments, grants-in-aid programs, and Federal agencies; 3,465 persons in New Careers; and 13,466 in the Supplemental Training and Employment Program (STEP).
Total enrollment in the Work Incentive (WIN) program since its beginning reached 285,491.
Enrollment as of June 30, 1971, was 109,182.
A shortage of child-care facilities and other supportive services kept the number of enrollees below capacity.
All 82 Concentrated Employment Programs (CEP's) were funded in fiscal year 1971.
The quality of performance improved over previous years.
Enrollment for the fiscal year reached 136,000, of which 31,000 were placed in permanent unsubsidized jobs.
In addition to hiring, training, and upgrading disadvantaged workers, the JOBS program expanded employment opportunities for Vietnam-era veterans.
This was part of the Jobs for Veterans program, a cooperative effort launched by President Nixon to provide opportunities for veterans.
The JOBS-Optional program, operated by State agencies and created to replace the former on-the-job training program, included both entry-level and upgraded jobs in the private sector.
It was planned that the program would fund 40,000 enrollment opportunities in fiscal year 1972.
Scientists and engineers adversely affected by cutbacks in aerospace and defense industries in 14 areas were afforded specialized job search, relocation, and on-the-job training assistance to employ their skills in new fields of work.
More than 155,000 new participants were enrolled in MDTA regular institutional training programs.
The NYC summer program provided employment and training opportunities for 600,000.
Some 150,000 youth in school were provided part-time jobs, and 70,000 no longer in school were helped to obtain skill training and work experience.
The job bank system used a computerized list of jobs that were available each day in a major metropolitan area.
In some localities, a computerized job-worker matching system was used.
The number of job banks in the Nation grew rapidly during fiscal year 1971.
The most recent emphasis has been on job bank systems that encompass an entire State.
Goal of the program is to have statewide systems operative in each State by the end of fiscal 1972.
Workers who were adversely affected by foreign imports were eligible for special assistance under the trade adjustment assistance program.
These were workers who were unemployed or underemployed as a result of liberalized or expanded trade actions designed to benefit the Nation as a whole.
Under this program, the State employment service agencies provided cash assistance in the form of readjustment allowances to eligible workers.
The workers could receive readjustment allowances for a period of up to 52 weeks, plus an additional 26 weeks if they required this time to finish a training program.
Other help offered by the employment service included testing, counseling, skill training, and job placement.
Relocation assistance was provided if needed and desired.
Veterans were given top priority services.
Special help was also given to other groups, such as older workers; the physically and mentally handicapped; members of minority groups; and workers and employers in rural areas, particularly those in agricultural and forestry industries.
The Manpower Administration established a special division to insure that minority group members receive an equitable share of manpower services.
A nationwide review of the Rural Manpower Service was initiated.
It was undertaken as a response to a petition, filed by a coalition of 16 organizations representing migrants and other seasonal farmworkers, that alleged serious deficiencies in the Rural Manpower Service and requested that the service be abolished and replaced by one staffed by and oriented toward migrant workers.
In accordance with a new amendment to the Food Stamp Act, guidelines were issued to employment service officials to register and refer able-bodied food stamp recipients for appropriate manpower services.
At the close of fiscal year 1971, Job Corps centers had an enrollment of more than 22,000.
This was slightly above the capacity they were designed to hold.
During this fiseal year, more than 46,000 young men and women completed their participation in the Job Corps.
Figures for the first 10 months indicated that almost 77 percent of these youth were placed in jobs, entered military service, or returned to school after they left the Job Corps; of these, more than one-fifth began or were accepted into school.
Of the remaining 23 percent, some were too young to meet age requirements for jobs, some were looking for work, some were women who had married, and some had left the labor market.
The major thrust of the Job Corps effort in recent years has been the establishment of new Residential Manpower Centers (RMC’s) and Residential Support Centers (RSC’s) in or near large cities.
Recruit, train, support, and place youth in their home areas as opposed to the away-from-home community assignment originally customary.
Be smaller in size, permitting more individual attention for corpsmembers.
Utilize training resources from existing manpower programs.
Ultimately, there will be 28 of these RMC's and RSC's.
The Residential Support Centers usually have a capacity of 25 youth with severe personal problems who live at the center but are enrolled in worktraining manpower programs in the community.
In order to make the Job Corps more responsive to the individual needs of corpsmembers, four centers have been designated to carry out bilingual, multicultural programs to attract and retain more Spanish-speaking corpsmembers, and one center has been designed for Indian youth.
Studies are being conducted to deal with the problems of pregnancy and child-care needs which deter young women, who comprise nearly 29 percent of the current number of corpsmembers, from completing their training.
Union training and placement programs whieh had been successful in certain Civilian Conservation Centers were extended to eight additional centers.
The Jobs Corps educational program is being used by school systems and other educational institutions.
Both the public and private sectors have made many injuiries concerning materials.
The American Council on Education has recognized the experience of the Job Corps General education development (GED) program in bringing 17-year-old corpsmembers to the level where they can be tested successfully on the GED; this experience is one reason why the American Council on Education has recommended that the States lower their minimum age requirement for GED testing from 18 to 17 years.
High priority was given to opening up apprenticeship opportunities to minority youth, as directed in the Secretary's Equal Opportunity in Apprenticeship and Training regulation of April 8, 1971.
During the fiscal year, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training assisted in developing 20 new Apprenticeship Outreach programs.
By year's end 90 programs, all monitored by the Bureau, were recruiting, coaching, and helping minority youth enter apprenticeship.
By the close of the fiscal year, 10,133 such youth had been indentured since the program started in 1968.
Apprenticeship also provided substantial opportunities to veterans.
Apprentices included 60,708 veterans receiving benefits under the GI bill.
Bureau representatives assisted the Job Corps and the Transition Program in locating apprenticeship opportunities for veterans and disadvantaged persons.
Apprenticeship training conducted in correctional institutions in cooperation with multitrade, joint apprenticeship committees continued to demonstrate its value.
Inmate apprentices often are released before their parole dates and go directly into jobs.
Overall, the number of apprentices increased during calendar 1970, continuing a steady upward trend.
More than 378,000 received training.
By year's end, 45,000 had completed their programs, and 280,000 were still in apprenticeship.
More than 100,000 employers and 6,000 local unions participated.
In the federally serviced workload, 2,183 new apprenticeship programs were developed; at the end of the fiscal year, 18,060 programs were operating.
In support of technical assistance to developing nations, training programs in 70 industrial fields were planned, developed, and administered for 95 participants from 25 countries.
A notable advance in strengthening the unemployment insurance system was made by the Employment Security Amendments, passed by Čongress and signed by the President in August 1970.
Extends unemployment insurance coverage to nearly 5 million additional jobs.
Improves the program's financial base by increasing the taxable wage base and the tax rate.
Provides the first permanent method for extending the duration of benefits during periods of high unemployment.
Although farm labor was not included in extensions of coverage, the act directs the Secretary of Labor to “establish a program of research to develop information * * * as to the effect and impact of extending coverage to excluded groups with first attention·to agricultural labor.
As a result, the largest research project ever conducted on farm coverage was started, with 18 States participating.
Sufficient data for developing a legislative proposal are expected to be available early in the new fiscal year.
During the year, the program eased the transition to new employment for nearly 7 million workers temporarily jobless during a period of cutbacks in defense spending and efforts to check inflation.
It paid out $5.7 billion in benefits, 74 percent more than during the previous fiscal year.
Veterans needing assistance in the move to civilian employment received $302 million in benefits from the program of unemployment insurance for ex-servicemen.
Workers taking advantage of the new law's extended benefit rights received $350 million.
Ten additional States participated in the Services to Claimants Program, which expands traditional unemployment insurance services to include job-finding assistance.
Twenty States are now exploring this approach in selected metropolitan area offices.
In a decision of particular significance to the unemployment insurance system, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in April 1971 that States cannot discontinue payments to a claimant solely because an employer filed an appeal contesting a determination of the claimant's eligibility for benefits.
The court emphasized the need for full payment when it is due.
This decision will affect administration of the unemployment insurance program in every State.
Disaster unemployment assistance provided weekly cash payments to persons made jobless as a result of natural disasters such as hurricanes, tornadoes, or floods.
The payments were made through the unemployment insurance system.
Generally, these payments were equal to the average weekly unemployment insurance payment for total unemployment under the State's unemployment insurance law.
The U.S. Training and Employment Service was reorganized to provided better coordination of those functions supporting manpower delivery systems.
Two major components within the reorganized structure are the Office of Training and Employment Opportunities and the Office of Delivery Systems for Manpower.
In addition, a new technical assistance and training staff was established in order to provide the technical assistance to support the implementation of manpower training programs, through contractors and State employment service agencies.
The automated audit review system was strengthened to gather data needed to schedule automatically manpower training contracts for audits.
The system provides for timely audits of all program contractors.
The computerized property management system was installed.
It allows control of $50 million worth of Federal property utilized by manpower program contractors.
The system also includes property assigned to the 25 newly opened residential manpower centers and residential support centers.
Methods and procedural improvement surveys were conducted in the Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Atlanta regional offices; the survey teams examined management processes and provided technical assistance.
A number of nonprofessional employees of the Manpower Administration and the State employment service agencies were selected for participation in the Career Opportunity Program, the Public Service Careers program, and New Careers in the Employment Service program.
In these programs, the employees received skill training, basic education, orientation, counseling, and upgrading; they were employed at entry levels in the technical, administrative, and professional fields.
The Employment Security Automated Records System (ESARS) became fully operational.
Data are now available on the number of persons served by the employment service and the services they received.
The Operational Planning and Control System was instituted for regional and national office use; this is a nationwide system of planning, resource allocation, and control.
The Cooperative Area Manpower Planning System (CAMPS) was revised to establish mayors and Governors as the leaders in planning manpower programs for their areas.
Forty-eight States, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the District of Columbia, and 126 large cities had manpower grants supporting 664 planning and coordination staff positions.
To assist contracting officers in determining contractor responsibility, the special review staff developed a number of new procedures, including one for preaward surveys.
Another one is a procedure for dealing with contract noncompliance.
As a result of this procedure, the Manpower Administration recovered approximately $166,000 in contract funds allotted for supportive services which were not provided, or which were inadequately provided.
During its first full year of operation, the unified research and development program, formed early in 1970 by merger of the research and experimental-demonstration programs, enabled each activity to strengthen the other.
Research findings generated development activities, and the analysis of development projects was strengthened.
Research and development continued to focus both on obtaining information and interpretation useful in setting poliey and on testing new approaches to manpower development.
Bonding programs for job applicants with criminal records.
New programs for public service employment.
New models for delivery of manpower services in rural areas.
Provision of basic occupational language training to Spanishspeaking workers and some of their supervisors.
Pretrial diversion to manpower programs as a way to rehabilitate first offenders.
New efforts were undertaken to find ways to meet the distinctive problems of unemployed scientists and engineers and of veterans and to strengthen the employer services of employment security agencies.
In addition, a series of studies on apprenticeship was started.
Work continued on : Improving data collection and information on job markets; methods of designing paraprofessional jobs, especially in the health field, and ways of overcoming barriers to advancement from these jobs to more skilled positions; systematic ways for State employment security agencies to aid migrant workers; and internal labor market functioning, especially for the working poor.
Continued research and development centered on problems in manpower programs for people on welfare, utilizing recent experience of employers who have hired the disadvantaged to help guide other employers, and guidelines for postplacement support by manpower agencies.
Under the institutional grant program, 12 additional institutions received grants to conduct manpower research, and seven previous grant holders shifted to other funding.
The small-grants program continued to support doctoral dissertations and post-doctoral research.
Increased emphasis was placed on evaluation of manpower programs.
During the fiscal year, 29 contract and seven staff bodies were started and 23 studies were completed.
Long-range impact studies now underway on MDTA, JOBS, Job Corps, and NYC will be available next year.
These studies are expected to indicate the degree of the success of the various manpower strategies used in these programs in permanently bettering the economic situations of jobless and underemployed workers.
As part of the move to decentralize Manpower Administration activities, responsibility for civil rights enforcement was transferred to the 10 regional offices and the District of Columbia Manpower administrator on July 1, 1970.
Under the new setup, the regions conduct compliance reviews, investigate complaints, and negotiate actions to correct violations.
The national Office of Equal Employment Opportunity develops policy and guidelines and provides technical assistance, staff training, and monitoring.
During fiscal year 1971, it developed new policies and put into effect a new reporting system, conducted training sessions in seven of the 10 regions and in the District of Columbia, and assisted and monitored equal opportunity programs in the regions.
State employment security agency plans for improving minority staffing and upgrading were developed.
Another activity to assist minorities was conducting compliance reviews in areas where Spanish American and Indian needs are greatest.
Substantial progress has been made in eliminating violations once common in employment service offices, such as inappropriate remarks on workers’ application cards and discourteous treatment of minority applicants.
Action is also being taken to meet the need for more extensive training of employment service staff in its responsibilities under civil rights laws.
The Labor-Management Services Administration experienced a busy year in attempting to help employers and workers improve the Nation's collective bargaining system and meeting other responsibilities with which LMSA is charged.
The latter include enforcement of Federal laws regulating veterans' reemployment rights, union activities, and employee welfare and pension plan disclosures.
LMSA also administers certain key provisions of Federal labor-management relations under Executive Order 11491.
The Federal Government continued its policy of encouraging resolution of collective bargaining disputes in the private sector of the economy with a minimum of Federal participation.
Federal action was necessary, however, to terminate a nationwide railroad stoppage when the carriers and four railroad unions were unable to reach final agreement on new contract terms.
Three of the unions reached agreement during an extended period of restraint, but the United Transportation Union planned selective strikes which, after a period of litigation, were determined to be legal after exhaustion of the procedures of the Railway Labor Act.
Agreement was reached later by the parties following intensive mediation and a series of selective work stoppages.
Negotiations between the Nation's railroads and the Signalmen also led to a nationwide work stoppage, which was terminated by congressional action.
At the close of the fiscal year, negotiations between the parties were continuing.
The Assistant Secretary of Labor for Labor-Management Relations served as mediator in intensive collective bargaining sessions between the new U.S. Postal Service and seven exclusive postal unions which resulted in a historical first contract between these parties.
LMSA's “early warning" system continued to alert the Secretary to impending labor-management disputes in key industries and to keep him and other officials informed of developments in major collective bargaining situations.
Staff assistance was provided to three Presidential Emergency Boards established under the Railway Labor Act in disputes involving the Nation's railroads and more than 400,000 employees represented by five railroad labor organizations.
Such support also was given to a special mediator in the long-standing fireman-manning dispute.
In an effort to improve the climate of labor relations in the railroad and longshore industries, meetings with leaders of the parties were initiated.
Administration officials met in separate sessions with top representatives of American flag shipping companies, the International Longshoremen's Association, and the port employers from all major east and gulf coast ports.
A similar meeting was held with officials of all principal railroad unions.
The objective was to review collective bargaining problems and to provide the parties an opportunity to request technical assistance from the Department to help them in resolving the difficult issues facing them.
A new program was started to provide technical assistance in the area of labor-management relations to State and local governments and organizations of their employees.
The Department responded to requests from a number of States and cities for direct consultation and technical assistance on matters such as election procedures, unit determination, development of local public employee relations procedures, and State public employment study committees.
Studies were undertaken of the legal framework and the methods and procedures used in public labor relations in all of the States.
A bibliography on public sector labor relations policy decisions was developed.
Additional material is being developed to encourage and help State and local governments to establish their own procedures for resolving collective bargaining problems.
Under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964, the Secretary of Labor is called upon to ascertain and certify that working and employment conditions are not adversely affected by bus, rail, and rapid transit programs assisted by the Department of Transportation.
Similar certification responsibilities are given to the Secretary by the High Speed Ground Transportation Act and the Rail Passenger Service Act.
The number of applications for certifications has increased steadily since these statutes were enacted.
Under Executive Order 11491, the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Labor-Management Relations supervises representation elections and decides unit determination questions and cases involving alleged unfair labor practices and standards of conduct violations.
He also decides eligibility questions on national consultation rights under criteria prescribed by the Federal Labor Relations Council.
Fiscal year 1971 represented the first full year of operations under Executive Order 11491.
During that time, 1,431 cases involving representation petitions and unfair labor practice complaints were initiated in LMSA's 24 area offices.
By the end of the fiscal year, 1,322 cases had been closed.
In the same period, 781 representation elections were supervised by LMSA field personnel.
The Assistant Secretary issued 69 decisions based upon records of formal hearings conducted before hearing officers or hearing examiners.
The decisions pertained to determination of appropriate units, disposition of objections to the conduct of elections, challenged ballots, and unfair labor practice complaints.
They also dealt with issues concerning small versus large units, composition of units, supervisory status, exclusion of guards, management officials, confidential employees, temporary employees, military personnel “moonlighting" on their off-duty time, and loss of status as a labor organization under the Executive order due to failure to take affirmative action to prevent or stop employees from engaging in a strike, work stoppage, or slowdown.
The Assistant Secretary also issued 24 reports on rulings setting forth administrative or policy decisions on other aspects of the program.
The number: of active labor organizations reporting under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) declined from 50,968 to 49,345.
Approximately 3,340 investigations were completed, including 126 involving union elections.
The Department instituted 43 civil actions under the act in Federal district courts and was the defendant in three.
Sixty-five individuals were charged with criminal violations of the LMRDA in indictments or criminal informations filed in Federal district courts, including 20 as the result of LMSA participation in the Organized Crime Strike Forces, which operate in 17 major cities.
In addition, strike force activity led to the indictment of 20 persons and one corporation for violations of other labor-related laws.
Forty-six persons, including some indicted in previous years, were convicted of LMRDA violations; eight were acquitted.
LMRDA indictments against five others were dismissed.
Registration reports required under the Standards of Conduct, section 18 of Executive Order 11491, have been received from 14,255 Federal labor organizations.
By virtue of the Postal Reorganization Act of 1970, postal unions were to be filing under the LMRDA effective July 1, 1971.
Approximately 174,600 active employee benefit plans were on file with the Department under the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act (WPPDA) as of June 30, 1971, including about 43,700 retirement plans.
Approximately 900 investigations were completed, about 800 of which involved delinquent or deficient reports.
Reporting responsibilities and reports-processing activities were eased by the elimination of annual reporting by plans with fewer than 100 participants.
Bills dealing with the private welfare and pension plans introduced in prior Congresses were reintroduced in the 92d Congress, many with revised wording.
Subcommittees of the House Committee on Education and Labor held 3 days of hearings.
The Senate Labor Subcommittee has been making a comprehensive pension study and has issued a statement of preliminary findings.
The Department of Labor has cooperated with these subcommittees in their work and has continued its study of The Employee Benefits Protection Act and of ways and means of setting up a system of plan-termination insurance.
Another sharp quantitative increase occurred during fiscal year 1971 in the Department's responsibilities to veterans, reservists, national guardsmen, and others having statutory reemployment rights under the Military Selective Service Act of 1967.
Continuing the trend of the four previous fiscal years, the number of complaint cases filed grew from 4,852 in fiscal 1970 to 6,689 in fiscal 1971, a 37 percent increase.
The 1971 figure was 70 percent greater than the one for fiscal 1969, when 3,946 complaint cases were received.
The increased case load is attributable in part to the greater number of local LMSA offices able to handle this type of work.
This increase occurred in spite of a decrease in separations from the Armed Forces, from some 1 million during fiscal 1970 to an estimated 850,000 to 900,000 during fiscal 1971.
Approximately 70 percent of the new veterans participated in the referral procedure established in cooperation with the Department of Defense.
Each participating veteran was sent basic information about reemployment rights assistance and other services available to veterans through the Department of Labor.
About 50 percent of these veterans indicated they had preservice employers, who were advised of the basic provisions of the reemployment rights law.
As a result, many veterans were reinstated in their jobs without further action by the Office of Veterans' Reemployment Rights.
As before, copies of the referral forms received by the Office of Veterans' Reemployment Rights were made available to the Manpower Administration Veterans’ Employment Service (VES).
The VES offers assistance to veterans in finding employment in those cases where veterans did not have or did not choose to exercise reemployment rights with preservice employers.
Policy development activities in the area of labor-management relations were directed during fiscal 1971 to analysis and review of existing policies as well as of legislative proposals to amend our basic labor relations statutes.
Particular attention was focused on emergency disputes legislation, the status of farmworkers under Federal labor law, and various problems in the field of welfare and pension benefits.
Research activities included the completion and publication of the following studies: “Admission and Apprenticeship in the Building Trades Unions," and "Exclusive Union Work Referral Systems in the Building Trades.
Assistance was also provided to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development's Working Party on Industrial Relations in connection with its study on the measurement and impact of labor disputes.
The Employment Standards Administration, which replaced the Wage and Labor Standards Administration in fiscal year 1971, continued to consolidate the gains made by the merger of Labor Department bureaus and offices responsible for a wide range of worker's rights and protection programs.
These include wage and hour programs, equal opportunity Federal contract work, programs for women, wage determinations for Government service and construction contracts, and Federal employees' compensation programs.
An integrated management staff support group was set up for these varied programs, and arrangements were in process to merge the field staffs of the component bureaus.
Consolidation of the administration began with the appointment of eight regional administrators to unify ESA operations in the field.
Arrangements were made to expand to 10 the number of regional offices in order to conform with the departmental pattern.
The offices of the ESA Administrator and the Deputy to the Assistant Secretary were consolidated into one office and a new Office of Field Operations was established.
The latter office will provide a focal point in the national office for an increasingly complex and decentralized field operation.
Changes in program emphasis to meet current national needs will be implemented in fiscal year 1972.
A revised program activity structure and a cost accounting system were developed to reflect new program goals and the new organizational structure.
Several management studies have been planned for 1972 to provide guidelines for automating processes and further improving organization.
A major responsibility of ESA is enforcement of laws providing for minimum wages, overtime pay, restrictions on employment of child labor, plus the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, a number of laws regulating the wages and working conditions of employees on Government contracts, and the garnishment limitations of title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
With the integration of the Department's various programs dealing with labor standards and the realignment of regional boundaries, compliance activities were intensified in order to eliminate discriminatory employment practices and assure that current and prospective workers, particularly those in the low-income and minority groups, receive proper compensation and increased employment opportunity.
Investigations of establishments to check compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and other Federal laws in fiscal year 1971 disclosed that nearly a half million workers had been underpaid $98 million, of which $77 million were due 400,000 workers in the lowwage category, i.e., workers earning less than the Bureau of Labor Statisties lower family income for the area in which they work.
On February 1, 1971, a million and a half nonfarmworkers were entitled to annual wage increases totaling nearly $324 million as the result of a minimum wage step increase to $1.60 an hour, which was included in the FLSA amendments of 1966.
Special emphasis was placed on promoting employment opportunities for older workers through education, information, and informal compliance contacts in keeping with the stated purpose of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.
More than 30,000 compliance contacts resulted in removal of age limitations on approximately 1 million jobs.
Additionally, increased emphasis was placed on more direct enforcement activity such as investigation and specific conciliation efforts.
In order to provide the field staff with new techniques and methods for enforcement by mediation and conciliation, conciliation training programs were conducted in six regions in cooperation with representatives from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
In order to implement the provisions of title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act, effective July 1, 1970, a selective compliance program was directed toward preventing violative garnishment orders at the source.
Over 22,000 informal and 255 formal factfinding actions were initiated to achieve compliance in title III violation situations.
Approximately 41,000 complaints alleging violations of the various acts were serviced during the vear, an increase of about 17 percent over the previous year.
In a concerted effort to correct substandard labor conditions in all types of establishments, more than 65,000 investigations were made.
Child labor findings showed a dramatic increase over the previous fiscal vear with the scheduling of retail and service establishments not previously investigated.
The number of minors found employed in violation of child labor standards was approximately 67 percent greater than in fiscal year 1970.
Special posters and leaflets printed in English and Spanish explaining the law as it pertains to children of migrant farm workers were widely distributed with the cooperation of the Farm Labor Service, county agents and local school officials.
ESA continued to furnish technical consultative assistance to the States and other public and private agencies in promoting improved State employment standards and administration, and continued to serve as a clearinghouse on State labor law activity.
Assistance was rendered in connection with several legislative successes, such as passage of the first minimum wage law in Montana and the establishment of a State labor department in South Dakota.
The marked trend in the States from biennial to annual legislative sessions is enhancing State capability to take timely legislative action, with over 650 State labor laws enacted by the 1971 State legislatures.
A unified Office of Government Contracts was established to facilitate the handling of the various aspects of prevailing wage problems arising in connection with the issuance of Federal contracts.
The value of such a unified, centralized organization with respect to services to the clients served and to the Department itself was clearly demonstrated in the initial period of reinstatement of the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, after temporary suspension of Davis-Bacon by the President in February 1971.
ESA was able to issue thousands of wage determinations in a short period of time and thus deal with problems following the reinstatement.
The planned adoption in fiscal year 1972 of a new procedure of publishing Davis-Bacon area wage determinations in the Federal Register is expected to provide faster service for large numbers of contractors and materially reduce Government costs.
Increased efforts were made to cover as many contracts as possible under a single wage determination through the use of more broadly based area determinations.
ESA has also been significantly involved in evaluating the problems confronting government contractors who are seeking to institute a shorter workweek with longer work days.
In addition to considering the legal problems presented by the requirements for overtime pay after 8 hours a day under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act and the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, ESA has been studying the socioeconomic aspects of the problem and has scheduled public hearings for early in fiscal year 1972 to aid the Department in making recommendations on the matter.
ESA continued its efforts to insure equal employment opportunities for minority group members and women.
Although real progress is difficult to measure in the field of equal employment opportunity, ESA believes that there were some notable achievements during the fiscal year.
In fiscal year 1970, 102 cities were identified as targets for the development of hometown plans in the construction industry to achieve equal employment opportunity through voluntary agreements among labor, management, and community groups.
By the end of fiscal year 1971, there were 27 voluntary hometown plans in addition to four Department of Labor-imposed plans and one court-imposed plan.
Twelve plans included funded training programs.
Some activity toward an agreed plan occurred in almost all 102 target cities.
Over 31,000 compliance reviews were made by Federal compliance agencies.
Reviews of nonconstruction firms totaled 16,175, while reviews made in the construction industry came to 15,035.
This compares with some 6,000 compliance reviews made in fiscal year 1970.
Compliance agencies were given specific national guidelines to assist them in their compliance reviews of construction firms.
A major conference, attended by policy-level personnel from all the compliance agencies, was sponsored by ESA; program policies and procedures were discussed along with future activities in the contract compliance area.
Notices were issued to approximately 300 contractors, giving them 30 days to show cause why enforcement proceedings should not be instituted against them.
In some cases, contract approvals or awards were deferred pending the correction of deficiencies.
Four notices of proposed debarment were issued.
ESA also gave attention to discrimination based on religion and national origin.
The Secretary of Labor issued a statement directed to the heads of all agencies, indicating his desire that both areas be covered in the normal conduet of compliance reviews.
Adoption of guidelines on Sabbath Day observance was considered.
Activities on behalf of women workers were particularly notable.
Additional steps were taken during the year to reduce sex discrimination by Government contractors and subcontractors.
Sex discrimination guidelines were issued and a series of consultations was held with representatives from industry, unions, and women's organizations, and human resource experts to assist ESA in developing affirmative action procedures to eliminate discrimination and underutilization on the basis of sex.
Elimination of different pay scales for men and women employees doing basically the same work continued to be a goal of ESA.
Vigorous enforcement of the equal pay provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, coupled with a number of significant court decisions which considerably broadened earlier interpretations, resulted in nearly $15 million being owed to approximately 30,000 workers because of wage discrimination based on sex.
The vast majority of workers being discriminated against because of sex are, of course, women.
The total amount found owed during fiscal year 1971 exceeded the combined amounts for the three previous years.
Consultations with business, industry, and union representatives were held in five key cities.
The consultations had a threefold purpose: (1) to focus attention on the Nation's womanpower, (2) to provide an opportunity to clarify the laws and orders that prohibit sex discrimination, and (3) to stimulate management and unions to take affirmative action to open up more opportunities for women.
ESA also sponsored the organization of the Southeastern Coalition of Women Students, representing 200 southern colleges and universities.
The coalition provided ESA with channels of communication through which it could supply college women with information and services, and women students could make their needs known.
To meet the education, training, and employment needs of minority women, including Spanish-speaking, Indian, and black women, a variety of advisory-type services was initiated.
In Albuquerque, N. Mex., ESA worked with the local Equal Employment Opportunity Board's Southwest Valley Community Center in establishing an informational and vocational service for Spanish-speaking women and girls.
In Chicago, ESA started a pilot project with urban Indians to provide motivational and vocational counseling in a local Indian center.
A program related to employment and training needs of black and Spanish-speaking women was begun in the Miami-Dade area of Florida.
In Pacoima, Calif., another new project started to provide information to Spanish-speaking women about job opportunities and their rights under various laws relating to employment.
Among new programs to promote upward mobility for women was Better Jobs for Women—Denver, in which ESA and the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training cooperated to provide women handicapped by race or language with training, supportive services, and placement in skilled apprentice-type jobs.
ESA continued its efforts to upgrade employment in home-related services by cooperating with the American Home Economies Association on a project to develop job ladders and lattices in the field of home economics.
ESA also assisted in obtaining funding, on a pilot basis, for a household service business under the Manpower Administration’s JOBS program.
In addition to acting as a clearinghouse for information on all facets of womanpower, ESA provided a considerable amount of information and technical assistance to organizations and individuals promoting the Equal Rights Amendment.
Throughout the year, ESA worked closely with the State Commissions on the Status of Women, with ESA assisting in the establishment of eight municipal and three county Commissions on the Status of Women.
This raised to 16 the number of local commissions.
ESA administers workmen’s compensation programs for Federal employees and for certain private employees covered by Federal compensation laws.
In addition to compensation for loss of income due to work-related injuries or occupational diseases, these programs provide a full range of medical, surgical, hospital, and rehabilitation services, scheduled awards for the loss of use of parts of the body and/or facial disfigurement, and other miscellaneous benefits.
In order to reduce the time lag between the loss of wages and the beginning of compensation for Federal employees, a number of management-improvement changes were started in the past 2 years.
The results of these changes became noticeable at the end of fiscal year 1971, when the backlog of main cases had decreased markedly.
During the year, 111,852 reports of injuries to Federal employees were received, down 8,773 from the previous year.
New claims for compensation rose 3,192 over 1970's total to a new high of 20,987.
Benefits paid under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act amounted to $163,156,932, or 24 percent more than in the previous year.
Injuries to private employees covered by ESA's programs totaled 109,590, compared with 122,230 in 1970.
ESA is also responsible for developing and promoting compensation standards for the new pneumoconiosis (black lung) program, created by the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969.
The act provides for payment of benefits to miners disabled by pneumoconiosis in the Nation's underground coal mines and to the widows of such miners.
In March 1971, the Secretary of Labor promulgated criteria for determining whether a State's workmen's compensation law provides adequate pneumoconiosis coverage and, if so, be exempted from Federal administration.
By October 1972, the Secretary was to publish in the Federal Register a list of underground coal mining States whose laws meet the criteria.
To determine whether adequate coverage is provided, ESA is contracting with qualified professionals to analyze compensation statutes, rules and court decisions in each of the 23 underground coal mining States.
Six contracts had been completed by the end of fiscal year 1971.
In January 1973, ESA will assume administration of the Federal black lung compensation program covering employees in all States except those qualifying for exemption from Federal administration.
On December 29, when President Nixon signed into law the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, he called it "one of the most important pieces of legislation, from the standpoint of 57 million people who will be covered by it, ever passed by the Congress of the United States, because it involves their lives."
Annually, more than 14,000 people lose their lives in accidents in American factories and other workplaces and over 2 million are injured.
Recognizing the vast dimensions of the administrative problems involved in implementing comprehensive legislation, such as the Williams-Steiger Act, the Department began planning long before the act was passed and assigned top priority in 1971 to implementing it.
Internal departmental task forces were set up and discussions were held with recognized safety organizations.
Liaison was established with the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and has been maintained in all phases of implementing the act to achieve close coordination.
Preliminary contacts were also made with such Federal agencies as the Bureau of Mines and the Atomic Energy Commission to start work on necessary cooperative agreements.
Preparatory activities progressed with a nucleus of about 300 persons carrying out critical planning efforts.
In addition, a number of contracts were let to aid in developing systems and evaluating programs.
Four key areas received priority attention: State safety and health programs, standards setting, development of regulations, and training of personnel.
The Department's planning for implementation of the Williams-Steiger Act was strongly influenced by the administration's "New Federalism."
The Secretary wrote to the Governors of the 50 States as well as officials of the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands.
American Samoa, and Guam in March urging them to join with the Federal Government in carrving out the intent of the act.
In his letter, the Secretary said, "We are giving highest priority to the development of procedures which will enable the States to continue their current programs and to assume as quickly as possible the role envisioned for them by the Act."
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was established in April by the Secretary to implement the Williams-Steiger Act as well as other safety and health laws and programs formerly the responsibility of the Bureau of Labor Standards, which was assimilated into the new agency.
Basically, OSHA consists of three operating arms : (1) regional and area offices in the field, (2) the office of program operations in the national office, which includes standards development, compliance operations, State programs, and training and education, and (3) administrative support offices.
Staffing was well underway by year's end, with all 735 positions authorized for fiscal year 1971 committed and training of new personnel proceeding at a rapid pace with 180 persons completing seven safety and health compliance-officer training courses.
Two-thirds of OSHA's manpower is to be located in the field, operating out of 10 regional offices.
The proportion of staff in the field is expected to increase.
Regional administrators have direct responsibility for operations in multistate regions, reporting directly to the Deputy Assistant Secretary/Administrator.
Each regional office has staff units for compliance operations, State programs, technical support, and administrative services.
Members were appointed to the National Advisory Committee on Occupational Safety and Health, which is authorized by section 7 of the act.
The committee advises, consults with, and makes recommendations to the Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare on all matters relating to job safety and health.
The advisory committee has an important role to perform in bringing continuing public attention and interest to bear on the act and its program.
In addition, ad hoc committees will be established to assist the Secretary on special issues in his standard-setting funcion.
An initial package of Federal and national consensus standards was developed and published on May 29.
The initial standards package consisted of (1) construction standards promulgated on April 17, (2) maritime standards from previous legislation, and (3) general industry standards developed to provide coverage for industries other than construction and maritime.
Within this package, standards which were previously promulgated under other Federal laws were immediately effective under OSHA.
They pertained to those establishments which they previously covered.
For establishments newly covered by these standards, a 90-day familiarization period was established to allow employees to become aware of their responsibilities under the act and to take action to correct existing safety and health hazards.
The familiarization period also gave the States full opportunity to apply for an agreement under section 18(h) of the act, permitting a State to continue to administer existing occupational safety and health programs in the State while preparing a plan under section 18(b) for developing and enforcing State safety and health standards.
At the termination of the familiarization period on August 27, 1971, most standards were to become effective.
Appropriate additional time periods for compliance were provided where the standards require substantial modification of capital equipment or procurement of safety devices.
Since the date of promulgation of the initial package, efforts in the standards area have been directed toward editorial review and reorganization of the package, preparation of an index guide, assisting interested parties in the interpretation and understanding of the standards, consulting with the Solicitor of Labor on the scope of a particular standard and on delays of the effective dates for various standards, and providing technical support to the Solicitor and OSHA's field staff in responding to requests for variances.
During the establishment of OSHA, enforcement activities continued under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, the Service Contract Act, and the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, but at a reduced level.
Experienced compliance officers conducted training programs for the rapidly expanding field staff.
Recruitment and training efforts during the fourth quarter allowed OSHA to attain a staffing level of about 400 in the field by June 30.
In the inspection effort, top priority was assigned to castastrophe and imminent danger inspections.
The second level of priority was given to inspections resulting from complaints; third to establishments in target industries selected for their high frequency rate of injuries; and the fourth to a cross-section of all industries and establishments of all sizes to provide broad protection under the act.
It is expected that compliance and enforcement activities will increase rapidly with the establishment of fully operational offices in 48 locations and continued experience in the interpretation of standards, especially following the end of the familiarization period.
Compliance activities were directed on the basis of worst-first, with initial emphasis on advising employers of their responsibilities during the familiarization period.
In order to make an immediate impact on the elimination of job-related accidents and illnesses through this worst-first program, OSHA concentrated efforts on five industries that have among the highest number of disabling injuries per million man-hours worked.
These five industries employ 1.5 million workers.
The National Safety Council provided active support to OSHA in developing and promoting safety and health programs for these industries.
The industries selected, with their injury-frequency rates per million man-hours were: longshoring, 69.9; roofing and sheet metal, 43.0; meat and meat products, 38.5; mobile homes and miscellaneous transportation equipment, 37.6; and lumber and wood products, 36.1.
The national average injury-frequency rate for all manufacturing is 14.8.
Training and education will play a vital role in accomplishing the purpose of the Williams-Steiger Act.
Initial efforts were directed toward developing short-term safety and health training, including courses, educational materials, and instructor outlines, for employers, employees, and persons who administer the act.
Training courses for construction safety and health instructors was one of these efforts.
This program prepared a cadre of 597 instructors within the construction industry, each of whom is capable of conducting courses for supervisors on construction projects.
By year's end, the number of supervisors trained exceeded 1,500.
Plans were completed to conduct 10 additional construction courses throughout the country and to evaluate how effectively this training is being used.
In addition, OSHA planned for the establishment of five safety training institutes in strategic geographic locations.
Marked reductions in work-related injuries and illnesses, and their costs, can be achieved by effective training and consultative programs.
Such programs will be used to make those responsible aware of the magnitude of the problems and the techniques to improve the situation.
The safety training institutes will provide the facilities and programs for shortterm training in inspection techniques for personnel from both the public and private sector, for technical consultative services for all levels of industrial management on the effective implementation of safety and health standards and on the values of effective safety programs, and for courses to continue professional development of presently employed safety and health technicians and professionals to enable them to keep pace and better cope with new and emerging technology and its related hazards.
In its effort to achieve a high level of awareness and knowledge among covered employers and employees, OSHA developed radio and television public service announcements.
More than 5,500 copies of 22 spots on a 12-inch radio disc were distributed to radio stations around the country.
Three 30-second television announcements were sent to the major networks and to most of the Nation's local TV stations.
In addition, TV slides with live narration were sent to 700 TV stations.
Initial reports from a 20 percent sampling indicate that slides were used in 37 of the 50 States.
The use of radio and television public service announcements is a particularly good way of reaching millions of workers quickly.
Also, radio and television reaches many employees who might not readily read printed materials.
A major effort was made to consult with and involve the States in assuming full responsibility for administering and enforcing occupational safety and health standards.
Based upon the interest shown, the prospects for substantial State participation seem favorable.
All 50 States designated agencies to administer the act, as did the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and Guam.
Forty-four States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico had interim section 18(h) agreements to avoid preemption while developing their long-range plans.
The development of State plans which will meet the stringent criteria of the act is the most critical phase of the entire State program effort.
Participants are California, New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Washington, Oregon, North Carolina, and Florida.
State selections were based on geographical concentration of target industry establishments.
The Federal Government's internal employee safety program, Mission SAFETY-70, was concluded.
The 6-year program produced a 14.3 percent reduction in the Federal injury-frequency rate.
The reduction in Federal injury rates occurred while employee injury rates in private industry rose 20 percent.
The Federal injury-frequency rate dropped from 7.7 disabling injuries per million man-hours worked in 1964 to 6.6 in 1970, the lowest in history, though the goal was 5.4.
Calculations based on that reduction indicate that nearly 29,500 disabling injuries were averted and more than $22 million saved during Mission SAFETY-70's 6 years despite liberalized compensation benefits and rising medical costs.
Mission SAFETY-70 provided a broad, overall approach to Federal work safety.
This was followed by a program called ZERO IN on Federal Safety, which was launched by President Nixon in October 1970 to provide a specific approach.
Under this program, each Federal agency is required to find ways to locate the specifie work hazards which injure its employees—and remove them.
Agencies were also asked to establish statistical reduction goals for the ZERO IN campaign.
Over half of some 58 Federal agencies cited slips, trips, and falls as their most serious source of worker injuries and, consequently, this is their No. 1 program target.
Handling of materials and motor vehicle accidents ranked as targets Nos. 2 and 3.
These three causes account for 56 percent of the disabling injuries suffered by Federal employees.
Motor vehicle accidents, although only 4.3 percent of the total, are likely to be very severe and are the leading cause of accidental deaths in the Federal service.
The Williams-Steiger Act places greater responsibility on the heads of Federal agencies to establish and maintain an effective and comprehensive occupational safety and health program which is consistent with the standards promulgated by the Secretary for businesses affecting interstate commerce.
As the Nation's largest employer, the Federal Government has a special obligation to set an example for safe and healthful employment.
Therefore, OSHA has started new efforts to help Federal agencies strengthen their efforts to assure safe and healthful working conditions for their employees.
An Executive order was prepared to specify the requirements of the occupational safety and health programs in Federal departments and agencies and to establish a Federal Advisory Council on Occupational Safety and Health to advise the Secretary in carrying out his responsibilities under the order.
The Office of Policy, Evaluation, and Research carried out a broad program during fiscal year 1971 in its field of planning and developing policy for the Department, stimulating and coordinating its research and evaluation, and participating in the development of legislative initiatives.
Policy planning activities included: Planning for public service employment; programs to help the blue-collar worker; consideration of the effect of economic constraints on provision of child care; a role for the Department in a comprehensive national program of drugabuse prevention and rehabilitation; strategies for stimulating further growth of cooperative education; the rehabiltation of offenders; and the prospects for the increasing spread of the 4-day workweek.
In addition, staff support was provided to the National Commission on Productivity, on which the Assistant Secretary served as vice chairman.
The office worked with Congress on welfare reform and assisted the Ways and Means Committee in writing H.R. 1, the welfare reform measure.
The office, with the assistance of the Manpower Administration and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, prepared the pamphlet, "U.S. Manpower in the 1970's: Opportunity and Challenge," which was designed to inform the Nation's manpower decisionmakers of the important changes to be expected during the present decade.
This was the first year in which special funds for contracting out studies were appropriated to the Office of Evaluation.
By the end of the vear, contracts had been issued for 10 studies.
These included evaluations of Federal contract compliance activity on minority employment patterns and of several cooperative education projects.
Research studies included the problems of young blue-collar workers; career entry jobs for youth: drug abuse in the labor force; offender rehabilitation; construction industry wages; job satisfaction as reflected by absenteeism and turnover rates; public service employment; and employment among aerospace professionals.
Several in-house studies were performed by the evaluation staff.
Among those were an overview of employment service performance during the 1960's; a cost-effectiveness comparison of 10 manpower programs: assessments of new Job Corps centers and of new directions in established centers, and of progress made under the Philadelphia Plan; and an analysis of the relationship between time spent on welfare and participation in the Work Incentive program.
Staff assistance to the Department's administrations and offices continued to contribute to the development and utilization of an employability model which promises to become an effective tool for planning and assessing various manpower program strategies.
The staff also participated in the planning and proceedings of an Ohio State University conference on evaluating the impact of manpower programs.
In addition, Office of Evaluation staff assisted in developing estimates of the numbers and characteristics of target groups and outlining an overall evaluation and research plan for the welfare reform planning staff.
As the fiscal year ended, discussions were underway on redirecting the Office of Evaluation to service in guiding and planning the overall DOL evaluation effort, and on submitting results of evaluation studies to the Secretary and Under Secretary on a regular basis for decisionmaking purposes.
Further progress was made in coordinating the extensive research and statistical activities of the Department.
The Office of Research, working with a recently established Departmental Research Policy Committee, developed and placed in operation a Department-wide research programing system that includes a master list of research priorities and budgets reflecting these priorities.
This procedure is being closely integrated with the overall budget and program review procedure of the Department.
The Office of Research also was responsible for supervising development of coordinated research plans and joint activities in a number of areas of public interest.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics substantially expanded and improved its survey and research programs during the year as interest increased in BLS measures of prices, unemployment, wages, productivity, and other indicators of economic performance.
BLS initiated research on both a general price index and general wage index, and it significantly expanded the industrial price program.
Two cooperative Federal-State programs were launched—one to collect detailed employment data by occupation and industry and the other to compile data relevant to the Occupational Safety and Health Act which became effective in April 1971.
Wage surveys of municipal governments were completed; and three special studies of productivity were published for the National Commission on Productivity.
The Bureau published special studies on occupational manpower and training needs.
Vietnam-era veterans, children of working mothers, characteristics of collective bargaining agreements, labor migration within and between foreign countries, the social and economic status of Negroes, blue-collar/white-collar pay trends, postwar trends in labor compensation, and prices, escalation, and economic stability to help answer economic and social policy questions.
BLS strengthened and expanded significantly its price program.
Fifty commodities were added to the Wholesale Price Index in January 1971, providing a basis for several new indexes for product classes and subproduct classes.
Work was initiated on indexes for approximately 25 industries—an increase of almost 25 percent.
Moving toward a general price index, the Bureau began constructing indexes for motor freight and railroad freight rates, representing an economic sector for which price indexes currently are unavailable.
Export price indexes were published for certain machinery and other products which account for about 10 percent of U.S. commodities exports.
The Bureau published estimates of the 1969 and 1970 costs of three budgets for an urban family of four persons and the comparative living cost indexes based upon them.
An experimental project to develop other types of comparative indexes was carried out.
BLS conducted pilot testing of consumer expenditure survey methods in two metropolitan areas, as well as the first steps in processing the results.
Further research on collection and data coverage was carried out in preparation for the nationwide consumer expenditure survey, a major step in the periodic revision of the Consumer Price Index.
The Census Bureau will serve as the collection agent for the BLS for this survey, which will begin in January 1972.
In addition, preliminary design of a point of purchase survey to provide information on the outlets and areas in which purchases are made by families of different income groups was completed.
A staff paper on the problem of quality measurement in price indexes was published.
Research continued in the area of quality adjustments.
The Bureau investigated a technique for making quality adjustments in rental housing prices, and a paper presenting preliminary results of the study was published.
Empirical research into measuring substitution effects for a cost-of-living index was undertaken.
Also, papers on several conceptual issues in cost-of-living indexes were prepared, and a comprehensive study and reformulation of the theory of these indexes were completed.
General price analysis continued and reports were prepared on price behavior for selected sectors.
New procedures for verifying the Consumer Price Index were instituted and computer routines were developed for analyzing the index.
Portions of the outlet sample in several important cities were reviewed and, in some cases, revised.
BLS began research on a number of conceptual problems in several important components of the index.
In addition, considerable research and experimentation was done on the definition of the family to be covered by the revised Consumer Price Index.
The Bureau achieved substantial success in speeding up the reporting of basic employment and unemployment statistics, including the monthly press release.
Furthermore, to provide historical perspective on current developments in the employment situation, the Bureau introduced a series of 22 graphs that each month present recent trends in the major series on employment, unemployment, and hours.
As the year drew to a close, studies were being made of the impact of the 1970-71 economic slowdown and recovery on employment and unemployment, including comparisons with earlier periods.
Several new studies responsive to the need for information on emerging problems of particular groups in the labor force were conducted.
An analytical report on the employment of Vietnam-era veterans was prepared, and a new monthly series was started in Employment and Earnings.
BLS published additional reports on children of working mothers, in response to public and government concern with child-care needs; earnings of school-age youth, an outgrowth of concern with minimum wage and youth unemployment; and a 1968 table of working life for men.
The Bureau, in cooperation with the Manpower Administration, launched a cooperative Federal-State program for collecting and publishing data on current employment by occupation in manufacturing industries.
Estimates of employment by occupation for the Nation and for each cooperating State will be produced.
At least 15 States will cooperate in the survey of manufacturing industries.
Additional States will be cooperating in the survey of nonmanufacturing industries which will begin in 1972.
Initial research was started to develop information on the employment effects of Federal Government expenditures for pollution control, especially as it relates to increased employment prospects for scientists and engineers.
BLS published occupational outlook material aimed specifically at college students, and a set aimed at the disadvantaged also was prepared.
Occupational Manpower and Training Needs," which is used in planning education and training programs, was published.
This book contains information on job openings in the 1970's for 230 occupations as well as data on current training activities.
In order to provide a more comprehensive picture of labor demand in the Nation's manufacturing industries, the Bureau combined job vacancy data and figures on labor turnover—hires, quits, and layoffsinto a single release.
BLS began work on the development of a general wage index designed to measure wage rate changes exclusive of effects of industry and occupational shifts.
An index of wages for total private nonfarm employees, adjusted for industry shifts and overtime in manufacturing, was published.
Reports on trends in pay of firemen, policemen, Federal workers, and teachers were issued and 10 wage chronologies were initiated.
A new index based on the package cost of wages and fringe benefit levels as negotiated by collective bargaining was issued for the Maritime Commission's use in establishing subsidies to the shipping industry.
Several surveys of occupational wages in municipal government were completed and the results of pilot surveys conducted in 1970 were published.
The Bureau completed over 170 area wage surveys and service contract act surveys, 24 industry wage surveys, and eight union wage scale studies during the fiscal year.
A new study was begun of private pension plan provisions that may lead to or result in the involuntary retirement of workers.
BLS issued reports on employer expenditures for employee compensation in four industries.
The final report on pension plans in the 1960's and three reports on annual earnings and employment patterns were published.
The Bureau published the first report summarizing substantive characteristics of collective bargaining agreements.
Work continued on the revision of the next biennial edition of the union directory and on work stoppage studies.
The appointment of the National Commission on Productivity in June 1970 gave rise to a number of special studies, including a report called “Improving Productivity: Labor and Management Approaches," a chartbook called "Productivity and the Economy," and a paper entitled "The Meaning and Measurement of Productivity.
In addition, the continuing program to measure productivity in individual industries resulted in indexes of output per man-hour for two new industries, soft drinks and petroleum pipeline.
Also, the release of the annual indexes was speeded up.
Labor and material requirements in single family housing were studied to provide information needed by the Department of Housing and Urban Development for planning a program to meet the Nation's housing goals.
This study also offered some preliminary indications of productivity in the construction industry.
A BLS study enlarged the knowledge of productivity trends in foreign countries by comparing recent trends in hourly compensation, output per man-hour, and unit labor costs for all manufacturing in 11 industrial countries and for the iron and steel industry in five countries.
Finally, as part of the ongoing effort to assess the manpower implications of technological change, a study of technology and manpower in the railroad industry in the 1970's was completed.
The Bureau launched an occupational safety and health statistical program that provides the framework for a genuine Federal-State effort.
Federal planning grants were provided to 39 States and jurisdictions.
The Federal share totaled almost $650,000.
This expenditure will permit these States to begin developing a system of compiling statistical data relevant to the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
State operations will be modeled after the Bureau's comprehensive nationwide program.
This endeavor will preclude duplication of statistical activities by Federal and State governments and minimize the recordkeeping and reporting burden on employers throughout the country.
Efforts are also being made to avoid duplication through negotiations with other Federal agencies which have legislative responsibilities in safety and health statistics.
Economic profiles on five industries with high injury rates were compiled for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
These profiles included background material on employment and collective bargaining agreements.
BLS began planning a series of special studies which will attempt to highlight a variety of factors associated with or related to occupational injuries and illnesses.
Booklets containing the forms and instructions necessary to comply with the recordkeeping requirements under the new act were prepared for mailing to more than 5 million employers employing more than 60 million workers.
The Bureau published a joint report with the Census Bureau, entitled "The Social and Economic Status of Negroes in the United States, 1970," the fourth in a series started in 1967.
The Bureau also prepared "Black Americans, A Chartbook" based on material developed for the joint publication but aimed at a broader audience.
BLS prepared special reports and Monthly Labor Review articles on the following topics: Total income received by workers and their families in relation to the occupational and personal characteristics of the head of the family, which was included as part of a broader analysis of blue-collar pay trends; the economic status of families headed by women; trends in labor and leisure; and prospects for growth in preprimary education.
The report of the Cabinet Subcommittee on Construction Statistics was prepared.
The report contained an assessment of currently available statistical information on the construction industry and a series of recommendations for programs to improve this information.
For the second year, the Federal Editors Association cited the Monthly Labor Review for its success in presenting significant economic data in attractive, readable form.
In the November 1970 issue, a special labor force report on problems encountered by Vietnam war veterans on returning to civilian life was an early warning of the serious unemployment faced by this group.
The December 1970 Review included a survey of the economic status of families headed by women, another group whose situation appears to call for special attention.
A pair of articles in April 1971 looked at the much discussed "blue-collar blues" and recent attempts to survey working conditions and attitudes of American workers.
A major share of the June 1971 issue was devoted to three studies of wage trends among blue-collar and white-collar workers and the extent to which available economic data justify the feeling attributed to the blue-collar worker that he is being “left behind" in the Nation's move toward affluence.
The Bureau published “Labor Law and Practice" reports for Japan, Laos, and the Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands.
Other special studies completed were: A report on internal labor migration in the Soviet Union: an analysis of the purchasing power of workers in the Soviet Union; and a report for the National Commission on Productivity on public policies and practices to protect workers in Western Europe against negative effects of technological change.
A special issue of Labor Developments Abroad dealing with labor migration within and between foreign countries was published.
The Bureau published two popular economic pamphlets, "Postwar Trends in Labor Compensation" and"Prices, Escalation and Economic Stability."
The publications, "Major Programs, 1971, Bureau of Labor Statisties" and “Handbook of Methods for Surveys and Studies," were substantially revised.
The handbook contains in one volume detailed descriptions of survey methods used in all BLS statistical programs.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics cosponsored with the Puerto Rico Department of Labor the 29th North American Conference on Labor Statistics which had as a theme“Statistics for the Americas: The Role of Labor Statistics in Economic and Social Policymaking.
The 325 delegates included administrators, statisticians, and economists of State, Provincial, Federal, Central American, and South American (one)departments of Labor, educational institutions, labor organizations, and business firms.
The Solicitor has responsibility for all the Department's legal activities and the coordination and preparation of the Department's legislative proposals, reports, and testimony on proposed legislation, as well as executive branch clearances.
He serves as legal adviser to the Secretary and other Department officials.
Responsible to the Solicitor is an immediate staff of attorneys in Washington and in the field offices throughout the United States and Puerto Rico.
At the beginning of fiscal 1971, the Washington office consisted of six divisions, each headed by an associate solicitor.
With the enactment of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, a seventh division was established to perform the Department's legal functions under this law and under the safety provisions of certain other statutes.
Except for the Division of Legislation and Legal Counsel, which provides the highly specialized legislative services required by the Department, all legal aspects of each particular program are handled by one or another of the six remaining divisions.
The Solicitor oversees the litigation of the Department.
He represents the Secretary in instituting and prosecuting all civil court actions involving the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Equal Pay Act, and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, and in briefing and arguing appellate court cases under these laws.
He represents the Secretary in adjudicating cases before the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission under the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, and assists in the representation of the Secretary in civil litigation under this law.
Litigation services are also provided in cases under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, the MeNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act, the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act, the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and its several extensions, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Executive Order No. 11246, the Immigration and Nationality Act, and under title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
The latter title deals with restriction on garnishment.
This division provides legal services in connection with the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (LMRDA), the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act (WPPDA), and that part of Executive Order No. 11491 which authorizes setting standards of conduct for labor organizations composed of Government employees comparable to those applicable in the private sector under the LMRDA.
There were a number of important cases under the LMRDA.
The decision of the Supreme Court in Hodgson v. Local Union 6799, United Steelworkers of America, holding that the Secretary, in suing under title IV of the LMRDA, may challenge an election of officers only on the basis of alleged violations included in the member's internal union protest.
The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit's holding in Shultz y.
Local 1291, International Longshoremen's Association, that a union may not deprive a member of his right to file a complaint with the Secretary under title IV by failing to decide the member's internal protest within the statutory 3-month period.
The court concluded that a member is entitled to file a complaint with the Secretary if his internal appeal is still pending at the end of the 3-calendar-month period specified in section 402(a) (2).
The decision of the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Čircuit in Hodgson v. Local Unions No. 18, etc., International Union of Operating Engineers, holding that a constitutional provision which precludes branch members from running for local union office unless they transferred to the parent local violated section 401(e).
Hodgson v. International Printing Pressmen and Assistants’ Union of North America, where the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit upheld the Department's position that the 60-day provision in section 402(b) of the LMRDA was not mandatory but could be extended by agreement between the Secretary and the union.
Hodgson v. United Mine Workers of America, where the District Court enjoined the union, pending a final determination, from continuing to violate the recordkeeping requirements of section 206 and held that this section “requires the maintenance of adequate and sufficient records, contemporaneously made with the transactions involved from which the Secretary of Labor, as the representative of the public, and the labor organization's members can check to verify and clarify any expenditure made by the labor organization.
Local 610, United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America v. Hodgson, et al., which held that a union may not seek to enjoin the Secretary from investigating an election of officers or limit the scope of the Secretary's investigation strictly to the matters raised in the internal union protest.
The decision rendered in Hodgson v. Metal Workers Alliance, Inc., and Hodgson v. Independent Employees Union of Packerland Packing, upholding the right of the Secretary to issue binding instructions which the unions must follow in conducting supervised elections of officers.
The settlement of the election suit Hodgson v. International Union of District 50, Allied and Technical Workers of the United States and Canada, pursuant to which District 50 agreed to conduct a new election of all executive board members, including a new election of delegates to the convention at which the executive board members are to be elected, under the Secretary's supervision.
The union further agreed to conduct a new election for the offices of president, vice president and secretary-treasurer under the Secretary of Labor's supervision.
The opinions and interpretations phase of this Division's operations under the LMRDA, the WPPDA, and Executive Order 11491 also reflected substantial activity.
The division was an active participant in the Departmental task force evaluating the effectiveness of title IV of the LMRDA.
Two principal areas of this division are unemployment insurance and contract and grant activities under various manpower training and employment programs.
The two most significant activities in the field of unemployment insurance were the enactment of the Employment Security Amendments of 1970, Public Law 91–373, and the decision of the Supreme Court in California Department of Human Resources Development v. Java, 402 U.S. 121.
Public Law 91–373 extends unemployment insurance protection to approximately 5 million additional jobs, as well as making many other significant changes in such protection to employees.
The Java case construed the word “due" in section 303(a) (1) of the Social Security Act as meaning “the time when [unemployment insurance] payments are first administratively allowed as a result of a hearing of which both parties have notice and are permitted to present their respective positions."
The court found that a California predetermination factfinding interview was such a hearing and held that benefits must be paid promptly pursuant to a positive determination subsequent to such an inteview, regardless of the pendency of any appeal period or of any appeal.
In the contracts and grants area, the division participated in many significant activities.
Examples are the arrangement for the handling of appeals by contractors on disputed questions arising under Department of Labor contracts by the GSA Board of Contract Appeals as the Secretary's authorized representative.
The Department's regulations at 41 CFR Part 29–60 were revised to effect this transfer.
The division assisted in the drafting of Executive Order 11598 to provide for the listing of certain job vacancies by Federal agencies and Government contractors and their direct subcontractors with the State employment services.
The order was signed June 16, 1971, and at the end of the fiscal year the division was engaged in the preparation of regulations to implement the Executive order.
This division performed numerous legal and drafting services regarding the Administration's legislative proposals.
It also functioned as legal counsel to the Solicitor and to the Assistant Secretary for Policy, Evaluation, and Research.
Major legislative proposals on which legal services were provided included the welfare reform proposals embodied in the Social Security amendments, the Manpower Revenue Sharing Act, the Emergency Public Interest Protection Act, Employee Benefits Protection Act, amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act, and special legislation relating to labor disputes in the railroad industry.
The division provided extensive legal assistance in connection with the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which subsequently was enacted by the Congress.
Special assistance was rendered in connection with a construction industry stabilization system which was promulgated by Executive order.
Extensive assistance and guidance was rendered to Labor Department officials in preparing testimony and briefings before committees of Congress.
Legal activity in the area of administrative procedures included assistance to the Solicitor in his duties as a member of the Administrative Conference, and to the Department of Justice in connection with litigation against the Secretary under the Freedom of Information Act.
Extensive legal services were rendered under four statutes—the wage garnishment provisions of title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act, the construction safety provisions of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, and the “black lung" provisions (title IV) of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act, and until a separate organization was set up to handle it, under a new statute, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970. Regulations and orders establishing procedures for issuing safety and health standards were drafted. In addition, regulations under the Coal Mine Health and Safety Act“black lung" title were prepared.
In an administrative decision under the Service Contract Act in the Matter of White Glove Building Maintenance, Inc., SCA–64, it was held that the Department's regulations defining equivalent fringe benefits which a contractor may provide in lieu of those specified in a wage determination do not authorize a self-insurance plan.
The U.S. District Court for the Central District of California sustained the administrative findings.
The case is on appeal to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
In what is believed to be the first court order of its kind obtained by the Department, the appeals court, as a condition to staying the distribution to employees by the Secretary of Labor of amounts found due them from money withheld by the contracting agency from the contractor, required the contractor to file a supersedeas bond.
The bond will secure payment by the contractor to the employees of interest at 7 percent on the sums due for the period until the judgment becomes final, in the event of affirmance of the lower court decision.
The division prepared an opinion asserting Davis-Bacon coverage on a GSA contract for the painting of mailboxes which was appealed by the contracting agency to the Comptroller General.
In upholding the Solicitor's decision, the Comptroller General shored up the Department's position that a manufactured item can be a"public work" for Davis-Bacon purposes.
Executive Order 11588 of March 29, 1971 provides for the stabilization of wages and prices in the construction industry and conferred certain wage-stabilization functions on the Secretary of Labor.
It also established the Construction Industry Stabilization Committee and the Interagency Committee on Construction.
This division rendered essential legal services under the order, including the drafting of three sets of proposed regulations, those of the Secretary and each of the committees.
The division also assisted the Stabilization Committee, preparing legal opinions as to its jurisdiction and that of the various craft dispute boards with respect to wage increases provided in collective bargaining agreements.
Under title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act, Restriction on Garnishment, the Solicitor issued numerous interpretations, and provided the necessary legal services in connection with the granting of exemptions to Virginia and Kentucky from the provisions of section 303(a) of the act, and in connection with the denial of eight other States’ applications for such exemption.
There was successful title III litigation in Kansas, and in Ohio (where further litigation was in progress at the end of the fiscal year), to enforce the restrictions presented by section 303(a) on withholding of earnings by garnishment.
Also, by the end of the year, the Department was engaged in a number of cases in which it was alleging violations of the statutory limitations on the discharge of employees because their salaries have been garnished.
In the tariffs and trade area, the Office of the Solicitor assisted the Bureau of International Labor Affairs in certification of eligibility of groups of workers to apply for adjustment assistance under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
This included review of approximately 45 proposed certifications affecting 18,500 workers during fiscal 1971.
A total of 128 decisions of the Bureau of Employees’ Compensation under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act was defended in appeals before the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board.
Under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and extensions thereof, the division prepared 22 briefs.
Of 34 decisions rendered, 26 were affirmations and eight were reversals.
Six were made in circuit courts of appeals and 28 in district courts.
There was a significant increase in saving to the Govenment accruing from the third-party program under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
Gross recoveries amounted to approximately $1.3 million more than in fiscal 1970.
This resulted in a total saving to the Government of $3,084,478.30, which is more than $217,000 over last year.
Legal services in the civil rights area were concentrated upon the Federal contract compliance program under Executive Order 11246.
The successful implementation of the revised Philadelphia Plan and the extension of federally imposed construction plans and hometown solutions incorporated into bid conditions to a number of major metropolitan areas across the country, required a great many attorney man-hours to participate in factfinding and formal hearings, to engage in negotiation and the drafting of plans, and to advise the contracting agencies of their responsibilities under the construction contract compliance program.
The nonconstruction compliance program was significantly expanded by the full implementation of Order No. 4.
As a result, participation by this division's attorneys was required in preaward conciliation conferences, in defending lawsuits brought against the Secretary of Labor, in advising the agencies of the procedural and substantive aspects of debarment proceedings, and in prosecuting debarment cases on behalf of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance.
The Division also provided extensive assistance in the formulation and implementation of the Department's recent regulations for equal employment opportunity in apprenticeship, and continued its close involvement with the Manpower Administration's title VI civil rights compliance program.
Substantial legal assistance was provided to the Department of Justice in dealing with cases involving labor-relations problems.
Notably, this division assumed complete responsibility, with the permission of the Attorney General, for the preparation and trial of U.S. v. Florida E. Coast Ry.
It took more than a year to prepare and dispose of preliminary motions; the case is scheduled for trial during fiscal 1972.
During 1971, the demand for legal services under Executive Order 11491 increased sharply due to the implementation of labor-management-relations programs by the 26 area and six regional offices established by the Assistant Secretary for Labor-Management Relations.
All representation and unfair-labor-practice cases, numbering 2,096, processed through these offices to the national Office of Federal Labor-Management Relations were reviewed for legal sufficiency by the division's attorneys.
Moreover, several court actions against the Assistant Secretary arising from Executive Order 11491 activities were defended by the Division in cooperation with U.S. attorneys.
The Division defended the Department of Labor in unfair-labor-practice, contractgrievance and adverse-action cases, and represented its interests in representation-case matters involving the Department's subdivisions.
Substantial assistance was given the Secretary pursuant to his laborrelations responsibilities under the Rail Passenger Service Act of 1970, establishing the Amtrak system of intercity rail passenger service.
This division, while maintaining approximately the same overall level of litigation activity in fiscal 1971 as in fiscal 1970, made dramatic gains in the antidiscrimination area.
Thus, of the 1,787 cases instituted under the Fair Labor Standards, Equal Pay, and Age Discrimination in Employment Acts, 101 were brought under the Equal Pay Act, representing more than a 100 percent increase over those brought in 1970; 39 cases were brought under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, as compared with 11 in 1970.
The Solicitor's Office recovered more than $1,700,000 in unpaid wages due employees as a result of equal pay violations, and some 1,800 women received pay inereases when their wages were raised to equal those of men performing equal work.
FLSA suits were brought against three States (Illinois, Indiana, and Missouri )and a number of subordinate political subdivisions under the 1966 FLSA amendments.
The increased litigation under the 1966 FLSA amendments and the Equal Pay and Age Discrimination in Employment Acts is reflected in the substantial increase in the number of cases appealed.
Forty-four briefs were filed in courts of appeals for the various Circuits and in the U.S. Supreme Court.
Twenty-nine cases were decided by the appellate courts; 20 decisions sustained the Department's position, four upheld its position in part, and five rejected the Department's position.
Six petitions for certiorari filed by employers were denied by the Supreme Court, thus preserving the appellate decisions favorable to the Department.
Several of the favorable appellate decisions dealt with the provision for restitution of unpaid back wages of the FLSA's injunction section, making that section a much more effective enforcement tool.
Two such decisions held that neither good faith (Shultz v. Mistletoe Eæpress Service, Inc., C.A. 10, 434 F.2d 1267) nor the size of a business or the possible financial hardship to it (Hodgson v. Taylor, C.A. 8, 439 F.2d 288) is a valid reason for denying restitution of the unpaid wages due employees.
Another decision (Hodgson v. American Can Company, C.A. 8, 444 F.2d 916) upheld the award of restitution in an Equal Pay Act suit brought by the Secretary under section 17 of the FLSA, and in addition ruled that prejudgment interest should be recovered.
Preijudgment interest was also held recoverable in a suit brought by individual emplovees under Section 16(b), McClanahan v. Mathews, C.A. 6, 440 F.2d 320.
Another significant decision under the act's remedy provisions is Hodgson v. Hotard, 436 F.2d 1110, where the Fifth Circuit held that the employer has the burden of proving financial inability in civil contempt proceedings.
Two appellate decisions construed the FLSA's enterprise coverage provisions as they apply to firms which manage buildings owned by others.
One of these decisions (Hodgson v. Falk, C.A. 4, 439 F.2d 340) sustained the Department's position in toto—that such a firm is an emplover of the workers who maintain the buildings, that the firm's annual gross volume of sales is to be measured by the total rentals received from tenants of the buildings and not merely by the firm's fees or commissions, and that the firm's activities in managing, renting, and maintaining the buildings are "related activities" performed for a “common business purpose.
In the second decision (Hodgson v. Arnheim & Neely, Inc., C.A. 3, 444 F.2d 609), the court agreed on the employer-employee and gross annual sales points, but expressed the view that each building should be viewed as a separate “enterprise."
A petition for rehearing was filed in the Arnheim & Neely case, and the employer-defendant in F'alk was seeking Supreme Court review.
Another important coverage decision, Automatic Laundry Council v. Shultz, C.A.D.C., 433 F.2d 689, held that the Act's enterprisecoverage provisions for laundry and dry-cleaning establishments apply to coin-operated laundries.
A number of the decisions involved the FLSA's exemption provisions.
Among the more significant of these decisions were ones holding that the retail exemption is inapplicable to: a medical clinic (Shultz v. Nalle Clinic, C.A. 4, 444 F.2d 17) ; a firm engaged in the home installation of air-conditioning and heating systems (Shultz v. W. R. Hartin & Son, C.A. 4, 428 F.2d 186) ; and a towing firm which did a substantial part of its business with auto clubs (Gray v. Swanney-McDonald, Inc., C.A. 9, 436 F.2d 652).
The Occupational Safety and Health Division, which was established within the Office of the Solicitor after President Nixon approved the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, provides staff support to the Assistant Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health and to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as a whole.
Most legal services are provided in interpreting and applying the Williams-Steiger Act, a comprehensive occupational safety and health statute of general application.
Legal services are also provided under the safety provisions of the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, and under the safety and health provisions of the following proprietary statutes: Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, Service Contract Act, and ConstructionSafety Act; the National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities Act, Vocational Rehabilitation Act, and the safety provisions of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA).
Executive Order 11612 (36 F.R. 13891) has been issued under the Williams-Steiger Act and the FECA relating to safety and health programs for Federal employees.
Specifically, the Division provided legal services in connection with the initial package of occupational safety and health standards issued under 6(a) of the act and published in the Federal Register on May 29, 1971.
The package included: Standards issued under the Construction Safety Act on April 24.
1971: Maritime Standards from the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act; established Federal standards from the Walsh-Healey Act; and national consensus standards developed by the American National Standards Institute and by the National Fire Protection Association.
The Division was also increasingly active in compliance matters, including representation of the Secretary before the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission.
The Division also rendered legal advice and assistance regarding the issuance of regulations pertaining to State participation under arrangements pursuant to section 18 of the act, and contributed legal guidance in the preparation of a comprehensive compliance manual for use in enforcement work under the act.
Coordination of decentralization efforts and simplification of procedures were features of the administrative functions of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration during fiscal year 1971.
In support of the President's effort to bring Government services closer to the people, the Office of Management Systems coordinated the Department's program for decentralizing authority and for relying more heavily on State and local governments' participation in Federal programs.
In the area of simplification of procedures and elimination of red tape, a concerted Departmentwide study of all reports resulted in savings of over $1 million in Federal processing and over 1 million man-hours of the public's time.
New Regional Administrative Offices were opened during the year in Seattle and Denver.
Although providing limited services to the regions served, these offices will expand their staffs and the services they provide as other administrations and offices of the Department move into these regions.
Defense mobilization duties and responsibilities were reassigned from the Deputy Under Secretary to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.
The Office of Investigations and Emergency Preparedness was given this program, which entails coordinating the Departmentwide development of emergency plans and programs for civilian manpower mobilization, economic analysis, and wage stabilization.
Regional audit offices were established in Boston, Kansas City, Philadelphia, and Dallas to provide more comprehensive audit services to the program managers of the Department.
There are now eight regional audit offices in departmental regional cities.
The Comptroller General approved the design of seven of the nine components of the Department's Integrated Accounting and Financial Management Reporting System and the Federal-State Employment Security accounting system.
These systems, supported by the Department's data processing center, incorporate all current Federal accounting concepts, including accrual accounting, output measurement, and organizational and program costing.
Actions were taken to reduce the quantity and improve the quality of data submitted to the Office of Management and Budget and to Congress in support of the Department's budget estimates.
Favorable comments on these improvements were made by the chairmen of the respective subcommittees of the Committees on Appropriations of both the House and the Senate.
A new 40-hour course, "Management Techniques for Supervisors," was developed and implemented during the year.
Its purpose is to provide basic supervisory training for all supervisors within the Department.
During the year 348 supervisors—189 in the national office and 159 in six regional offices—received this training.
As part of its responsibility for continuing leadership in the personnel area, the Office of Personnel conducted a series of team-building workshops which were designed to improve organizational effectiveness.
These workshops were carried out in a number of the program areas in the Department, including the Wage and Hour Division and the Bureau of International Labor Affairs.
In response to a memorandum from the President to all executive agencies calling for a review of young professional programs, a task force was commissioned by the Secretary to study the role of young professionals in the Department.
A questionnaire was mailed to nearly 1,000 professional employees under 30, with a 75 percent response rate.
After departmental review, recommendations will be presented to the Secretary.
Pursuant to the Department's effort to centralize data processing support services, construction of a permanent site was completed and facilities were installed and are now in operation.
A large-scale computer was purchased and work previously contracted to private firms is being converted to the new facility.
Plans were begun to make the powerful central capabilities directly available to regional and local operations through the development of telecommunications systems.
The library's collection of over 425,000 volumes covers literature relating to all phases of economic and social life which affect working people, their employment, and the nation's labor needs.
The library has continued to acquire books, periodicals and other literature necessary to meet the needs of management, research, and other personnel of the Department.
To provide better control of the records of library materials borrowed, a new circulation system was established.
A wide range of important activities in the international labor field was continued during fiscal year 1971 by the Bureau of International Labor Affairs.
Through the Department of Labor International Technical Assistance Corps (DOLITAC), technical assistance programs were initiated in 32 countries.
The Department also inaugurated a program of predischarge employment counseling at overseas military installations as part of the President’s Jobs for Veterans program.
In the adjustment assistance program designed to aid U.S. workers dislocated by increased foreign imports, special emphasis was placed on reemployment and retaining goals.
Approximately 18,000 workers became eligible for such assistance during the year.
The Department took part in interagency efforts seeking to determine the future course of U.S. foreign economic policy.
The Deputy Under Secretary delivered extensive presentations on the manpower implications of trade policy to both the Senate Finance Committee and the Joint Economic Committee.
Also in the field of trade and tariffs, the long-term arrangement on cotton textiles was extended for 3 years, and 16 bilateral agreements, two of them new, were reached.
Training and cultural programs in the labor and manpower fields were arranged for 760 foreigners visiting the United States under the sponsorship of the Agency for International Development, the State Department, the United Nations (U.N.), and other organizations.
The visitors included the Ministers of Labor of France, the United Kingdom, Australia, Costa Rica, and Dahomey.
A series of traveling seminars and exhibits was conducted by the Department for the U.S. Information Agency in eight countries of Latin America, Asia, and Europe.
The Department continued its participation in the International Labor Organization (ILO) and other U.N. agencies, as well as in the Manpower and Social Affairs Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
An interagency study of U.S. participation in the ILO was directed by the Department as a result of concern over recent trends in the organization.
Within the year, successes were noted in checking the trends.
Rabat, Morocco, for labor attachés from Europe and Africa; and collaborated in the organization of a program on containerization in the maritime and longshore industries in which trade union leaders from 21 nations took part.
The Employees' Compensation Appeals Board substantially speeded up its decisions on appeals and reduced its caseload backlog in 1971.
The Board’s function is to rule on appeals from decisions on claims arising under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, involving work-connected injuries and diseases.
The average time for deciding an appeal in 1971 was 3.9 months, compared with 4.8 months in 1970.
Only 28 cases were pending at the end of the fiscal year, which began with a backlog of 47 appeals.
During 1971, 131 new appeals were docketed and 150 were closed.
These gains put the Board's operations in the best status since the body was established in 1946, both in number of pending cases at the end of a fiscal period and the average time lapse between filing and closing an appeal.
The Department expanded and refined its efforts to increase public awareness of its many services and programs available to working Americans and to those who want to work.
Recognizing the major role that electronic media have assumed in modern communication, the Department put heavy emphasis in 1971 on materials for radio and television use.
Complete program packages, including basic films, were developed for television stations serving major population areas.
Such subjects as the use of computerized job banks by the public employment services and job-training opportunities in construction trades were covered.
Card messages dealing with wage and hour laws, age and sex discrimination, and child labor were distributed to some 2,500 community antenna cable operations for telecasting.
Story suggestions and research material for documentaries and news features were supplied to networks and independent television and radio stations.
The need to educate some 57 million workers and more than 4 million employers regarding their rights and obligations under the new Occupational Safety and Health Act offered an excellent opportunity to utilize the resources of radio and television.
A 12-inch disc, containing 22 spot announcements explaining the new act, was distributed to radio stations throughout the country.
In addition, three 30-second television announcements were prepared and sent to networks and most local TV stations.
Information briefs, summarizing activities of the Department, and major actuality statements by the Secretary and other Department executives, were made available daily to broadcasting outlets.
Nearly 4,000 station pick-ups were logged during the year.
Several motion pictures were produced during the year, including two films on Job Corps recruiting, one depicting the use of job banks to help match workers and jobs in large labor market areas, one showing veterans how to prepare for job interviews, one explaining the broadened unemployment insurance system, one describing Wage and Hour Division services to workers and another, developed in cooperation with the National Association of Home Builders, informing young persons of job opportunities in the building trades.
For the 9th consecutive year, the Advertising Council, Inc. cooperated with the Department in conducting a nationwide advertising campaign to encourage young people either to continue their education or to obtain training which would prepare them for meaningful jobs.
The campaign won several major awards for effectiveness and creativity, including an award at the 1971 Cannes Film Festival for a television color spot on“Continue Your Education.
Efforts to keep the reading public informed of Department activities continued.
Press releases highlighting major events and program developments were distributed to news correspondents across the country.
The policy of releasing news stories and features through local field offices whenever circumstances permitted was accelerated.
Specifie aspects of the Department’s work were described in a number of special publications.
Departmental periodicals such as the Monthly Labor Review, Safety Standards, Occupational Outlook Quarterly, and Manpower described developments in depth for special audiences.
In addition, articles by the Secretary and other top officials of the Depatment appeared in a variety of technical and popular publications across the country.
New efforts to reach persons and groups with special problems or interests were initiated.
Multimedia informational activities were launched to inform jobless veterans and unemployed engineers, scientists, and technicians of special programs available to help them find jobs.
A news service designed for the Spanish-speaking population of the Nation began publication.
Called Noticias de la Semana, it rapidly won a large audience of Spanish-language newspaper, radio and television stations, and interested individuals and organizations.
Three established news packets continued to be prepared and distributed weekly.
One, directed to weekly newspapers, carries from the Department news of interest to residents of small towns and rural communities.
Another is designed for newspapers and magazines with predominantly black readership, and the third goes to labor union publications.
An in-house publication, Forum, kept Labor Department employees informed of happenings within the Department.
Special exhibits illustrating facets of several departmental programs were displayed at conventions and trade fairs around the country.
New, low-cost production methods utilizing cheaper and more adaptable materials, including reusable framework skeletons, were adopted.
Overall exhibit costs, particularly shipping expenses, were substantially reduced, while visual appeal increased.
Person to person communications also played a role in the Department's information program.
Secretary Hodgson and other top officials presented numerous addresses before labor organizations, business groups, civic associations, and educational bodies.
Thousands of individual requests for information, received by telephone, letter, and personal visits, were handled by employees in Washington and in field offices throughout the country.
These activities plus many others, combined to form a diversified program for informing the public of Department of Labor activities to further the welfare of the American workforce.