American workers won many new rights and protections during fiscal year 1974.
They also confronted many problems.
The Department of Labor played a leading role on both tronts.
It helped secure greater benefits for wage-earners through new legislation, improved programs and a stronger enforcement effort.
It also helped workers cope with the ongoing problems of employment discrimination.
The Department was able to deliver these services more efficiently during the year by revamping its field organization and operations.
This move was part of a governmentwide effort to decentralize federal services, turn back federal funds and decisionmaking authority to state and local government officials, and thereby bring government closer to the people affected by it.
One of our first steps toward decentralization was to increase the authority exercised by the Department's regional directors.
As the Secretary's representatives in the ten federal regions, they became responsible for allocating staff and fund resources in a manner befitting the needs and priorities of people and wageearners in their areas.
Regional staffs began developing a closer working relationship with state and local government officials, providing them with technical assistance in carrying out their new responsibilities under decentralized federal programs.
One of their new responśibilities was the design and operation of locally tailored manpower programs under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act.
Enactment of this law in December 1973 was a highlight of the decentralization effort.
It also signalled a major shift in government manpower policy and marks a milestone in the way this nation helps people prepare for and find meaningful, productive jobs.
By giving States and larger local government units the authority and funds to structure their own manpower programs, it enabled grass-roots officials to serve the interest of their own people more efficiently.
Significantly, this new effort and many others by the Department during the year encompassed the interests of all American workers—from young children pressed into service to help harvest crops to older members of the workforce facing retirement.
Women, blacks, Hispanic and Indian workers, veterans and nonveterans, those in teeming cities and those in remote rural areas, those on assembly lines and those in professional occupations—all were somehow touched by the programs of this Department during the fiscal year.
Unemployment insurance took on new importance with the energy crisis.
The Federal-State unemployment insurance system provided security for workers who lost their jobs and helped keep the local economies running in the communities that were hit the hardest.
Act, which would extend benefits in areas with especially high unemployment.
This legislation was still pending at the fiscal year's end.
One reason for this particular proposal was to take care of any high unemployment, for any reason, not just that related to the energy crisis.
However, under existing laws we continued to give priority treatment to special unemployment programs.
A total of nearly 7 million persons, including victims of 45 major disasters and the energy-related unemployed, received assistance.
1974 was a year in which we concerned ourselves not only with those temporarily out of work, but also with those who had retired from the workplace.
The importance of security in life's later years was at the heart of the pension reform legislation—the Employee Retirement Income Security Act—which was nearing passage at the end of the fiscal year.
The Department prepared itself for its important role under this landmark legislation, which will protect the benefit rights of millions of workers in the private sector.
There is nothing more tragic than the plight of a person who has worked until retirement age, only to find a counted-on pension not there because of a sudden dismissal, an employer's business failure, or a fund's mismanagement.
We moved ahead on two front to protect older workers still in the workforce.
First, we took steps to quickly implement the 1974 amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act, which, among other things, extend the Age Discrimination in Employment Act to workers in local, State and Federal government.
Then we launched a vigorous campaign against age discrimination in the private sector.
Our most significant victory so far was a $2 million settlement with a standard Oil Company of California division.
We hope this action will deter other employers inclined to discriminate against workers 40 to 65 years of age.
The 1974 amendments gave us other powerful tools to help American workers, and we moved to implement them firmly but fairly.
The Federal minimum wage was increased, bringing immediate raises to more than four million of the Nation's lowest-paid workers.
The minimum will go up to $2.30 an hour, effective January 1, 1976, in a series of steps.
The minimum wage and other Fair Labor Standards Act protections now cover almost 56 million workers.
Among other things, the 1974 amendments extended both FLSA and Age Discrimination in Employment Act coverage to government employees at all levels.
FLSA protection was also given to more than 11/2 million domestic workers, a group whose members have often worked long hours at low pay in the past.
We moved ahead in any ways toward our goal of eliminating discrimination of all kinds from the workplace.
In our campaign to help women obtain equal pay for equal work, we scored key court victories.
This was the year the Supreme Court handed down its first Equal Pay Act decision, a fact of extreme importance for the women who make up nearly 40 percent of the Nation's workers.
The court upheld the principle of equal pay, even when jobs are not exactly the same.
Our efforts to help minority group members and women were bolstered by a precedent-setting agreement between the Federal government and nine major steel companies, setting goals and timetables for hiring and providing for $31 million in back pay.
This was only one of several landmark legal cases the Department won.
However, we did not confine our equal rights efforts to the courtrooms.
Through the Federal-State employment service we continued to help give the disadvantaged the tools to help themselves.
The joint labor-management Task Force on Apprenticeship, which turned in its report near the end of the fiscal year, paved the way for reactivation of the Federal Committee on Apprenticeship, with minority group representation for the first time in its history and its first women members in 34 years.
Through this committee, we hope to work with labor and industry to broaden the apprenticeship program, creating more opportunities for more young people of all races, and of both sexes, and extending the program to more occupations and industries.
This Department's concern for the welfare of workers took on new meaning during the year for the physically and mentally handicapped.
All too often in the past, handicapped workers have been barred from holding any job at all.
The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 gave the Labor Department the responsibility of ending such discriminatory practices by firms holding Federal contracts.
We moved quickly to issue regulations implementing this provision, and they were issued shortly before the end of the fiscal year.
Now, almost all Federal contractors must take affirmative action to hire handicapped workers, and those with larger contracts must have written affirmative action plans.
We intend to enforce this provision vigorously so that the goal of equal opportunity in the workplace can become a reality for these Americans.
Through the year, the Department continued its efforts to help men and women on welfare to move into jobs.
The Work Incentive Program, in which we cooperate with the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, has given many of these people the dignity of earning their own way.
This program is an important device for reducing public aid costs at all governmental levels and breaking the poverty cycle for many Americans.
We also helped during the year to repay the Nation's debt to the young Americans who have served in our Armed Forces.
Working with industry, we have sharply reduced the unemployment rate among Vietnam-era veterans.
In part, this has been achieved through the program of requiring Federal contractors to list their job openíngs with the Federal-State employment service.
We do not intend to relax, however, until every veteran has a decent job.
One of our most important roles in the Labor Department is working with labor and industry to reduce occupational safety and health hazards.
This year, we stepped up our enforcement of the Occupational Safety and Health Act and speeded up our program of developing new job safety and health regulations.
We further extended the Federal-State job safety and health partnership, which brings fuller enforcement of the Federal regulations to more workers.
We intensified our efforts to promote voluntary compliance by employers and devoted more of our attention to the increasingly apparent problem of health hazards in the workplace.
At year's end, we had established an emergency vinyl chloride exposure standard, and a permanent standard was being developed.
For the victims of past workplace hazards, dead or disabled, it is tragically too late.
But we can and do provide them or their survivors, with workers' compensation.
During the year, we moved to help the States upgrade their workers' compensation programs, and we initiated important new provisions which Congress enacted as part of the Black Lung Benefits program.
This program benefits victims of black lung, a disease afflicting many coal miners.
New rules went into effect January 1.
1974, and we moved quickly to implement them.
Looking back over the fiscal year, I feel we can take pride in our accomplishments.
It has been a full year.
We have received important new responsibilities.
And we have accepted these responsibilities and improved our effectiveness in existing programs that help and protect American working men and women.
The Manpower Administration's long-awaited move toward decentralization, partly accomplished through administrative procedures, was fully realized with passage of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973 (CETA).
A major reorganization of the national office also was effected during the 1974 fiscal year, and the physical move of all Manpower Administration employees into a single building was completed.
Immediate steps were taken to facilitate the shift of manpower program authority from the Federal government to State and local officials.
By year's end, more than 400 prime sponsors—usually cities, counties, or States—had been designated to administer manpower activities in their respective areas.
The Manpower Administration took on the role of providing technical assistance and guidance.
The Federal-State network of employment service offices increased its placement efforts and expanded or improved the services offered to employers and jobseekers.
Special attention was given to serving the needs of Vietnam-era veterans.
As categorical programs were being phased out or absorbed under CETA, the Manpower Administration moved to set up the machinery necessary to carry out its new responsibilities.
Regulations were drafted, technical assistance quides issued, and procedures established to administer the new law in the most effective manner.
The program to provide transitional jobs in the public sector, originally authorized by the Emergency Employment Act of 1971, was basically continued under CETA.
Although the new legislation differs in some respects, the public employment program still is designed to develop new careers or provide opportunities for advancement or continued training.
A few programs, including the Work Incentive (WiN) Program and the Job Corps, continue to be administered from the national level, although some authority has been delegated to regional offices.
Other programs with strong national direction are those for Indians, migrants and seasonal farmworkers, and ex-offenders.
Administration of research, development, and evaluation projects remains in the national office.
A highlight of the apprenticeship program was the reactivation of the Federal Committee on Apprenticeship, which includes minority representation for the first time and the first women members in 34 years.
The $5.5 billion in unemployment insurance benefits paid to 6.7 million individuals during the year included payments made due to 45 major disasters and the impact of the energy shortage.
Employment and Training Act of 1973.
It was signed into law by the President on December 28, 1973.
He called the Act one of the finest pieces of legislation to come across his desk during the year and said that placing decisionmaking authority for manpower in the hands of State and local governments was "a long overdue shift in intergovernmental responsibilities.
The Manpower Administration moved quickly to implement the new legislation.
By the end of the fiscal year, over 400 prime sponsors had been designated to carry out manpower activities in their respective areas.
In accordance with the new law, prime sponsors may be units of local government, such as cities or counties, consortia of such units, entire States, or a State serving the balance of its territory not included in any local prime sponsor's area.
Though most services provided were available under previous legislation, CETA streamlines delivery by consolidating programs.
The planning, design, and administration of manpower programs become the responsibility of State and local governments, which are eligible for direct Federal manpower grants.
The act sets no limits on the amount of funds that can be appropriated, but $2.1 billion has been requested for fiscal 1975.
Provision for some national manpower activities was included in the Act, with up to 20 percent of the appropriation available for these purposes.
Job Corps, a residential program providing training and supportive services to the most disadvantaged youth, continues under direct Federal funding and supervision.
The law also provides for federally supervised manpower programs for Indians and migrants, as well as other special target groups: youth, offenders, older workers, persons with limited English-speaking ability, the handicapped, and others with particular labor market disabilities.
In addition, the law authorizes federally supervised research, evaluation, experimental and demonstration programs, and the development of a comprehensive system of labor market information.
Prime sponsors have complete responsibility for managing their manpower programs.
They identify local needs, determine program operators, develop a comprehensive plan, design an organization structure, and establish a Manpower Planning Council to review activities and make recommendations.
The Manpower Administration insures that Federal funds are used properly and provides technical assistance and guidance.
Services that may be offered by a prime sponsor include recruiting, orientation, counseling, testing, placement, classroom instruction, on-the-job training, and allowances and supportive services for persons in training programs.
The act also specifically provides for transitional public employment programs in areas that have 6.5-percent or higher unemployment.
A wide variety of technical assistance material, prepared by the Manpower Administration by the year's end, included guides for prime sponsors on manpower program planning, program activities and services, organization and staffing, fiscal activities, management information systems, and program assessment, as well as a forms preparation handbook.
Final regulations on the comprehensive manpower program and grants to areas of high unemployment were published in the Federal Register on June 4, 1974.
The U.S. Employment Service continued to increase services during the fiscal year by making about 4.9 million nonagricultural job placements through its affiliated State employment service system.
This was an increase of 7.3 percent over the previous year.
The most marked improvement was reflected in the placement of young workers under 22 years of age.
The 1.3 million placed in this age group represented a 23-percent increase over fiscal 1973.
At the same time, the employment service continued its efforts to aid minority and poor applicants, as well as veterans.
Over 1.1 million minority registrants were placed in jobs, 14 percent more than in fiscal 1973.
About 600,000 veterans—two-thirds of them Vietnam-era veterans—were placed in employment.
With the shifting of counseling resources into a direct placement role, the number of individuals counseled fell by about 160,000 to slightly below the 1-million mark.
However, theinitial phase of an accountability system being developed indicated that counseled applicants were placed at double the rate for noncounseled applicants.
The job bank system—in which a computerized listing of job openings is distributed daily to employment service offices—was expanded during the year.
Nine more States started operating statewide job bank systems, bringing the total to 43.
All but one of the remaining States have job banks in their major cities.
Apprenticeship Information Centers in 34 local offices placed approximately 10,500 persons in apprenticeship, including more than 3,000 minority group applicants.
This reflects an increase of 5 percent in both total and minority placements.
The U.S. Employment Service developed an action plan to bring full equity of services to women in existing and new programs.
Steps were taken to insure that all ES guidelines provide equal employment opportunity for women.
Delivery of manpower services in rural areas was improved, with closer collaboration between State ES agencies and Tocal groups.
Eighteen Operation Hitchhike and 16 Concerted Services in Training and Education projects were conducted.
These projects broadened the range of services to rural areas, uncovered jobs previously not listed, increased placements, and promoted job development.
In six cities, implementation of recommendations to improve the employment service made by the National Employers' Committee began.
Early indications show a significant increase in placements, espęcially among special groups such as minorities and the poor.
Fifteen State ES agencies began participation in the Employer Services and Job Development Public Communications Project.
This 3-year project is designed to develop a high-quality multimedia public communications program for the employment service to increase job listings, registration of highly skilled jobseekers, and placements.
ES approved 454 loan and grant applications under the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act.
Certification was made that these loans would not result in the transfer of employment or business activity of the applicant from one area to another or have an adverse effect upon existing competitive enterprises in the area.
Forty-one offices opened under a project to relocate and rehabilitate local ES offices.
The project is one of the measures designed to overcome the drop in placements which occurred during the latter part of the 1960's.
It aims to rejuvenate and relocate offices so that improved services to jobseekers are provided in their own neighborhoods.
Obtaining jobs or training for Vietnam-era veterans remained high on the list of priorities of the employment service.
As part of the President's Veterans Program—an interagency and business effort to provide needed services to veterans—the employment service placed 600,000 veterans in jobs during the fiscal year.
It also provided overseas group counseling to 67,700 military personnel and individual counseling to nearly 22,000 more to acquaint them with opportunities for education, training, or employment.
To insure that veterans receive maximum service, 68 new field positions were established in the Veterans Employment Service during the fiscal year.
Almost half of the local ES offices also had a full-time veterans employment representative (VER) by the year's end.
Other offices had a professional staff member designated to perform the VER's function.
Unemployment of Vietnam-era veterans, which had reached a high of 11 percent at one time, dropped to 5.2 percent in the spring of 1974, and the Jobs for Veterans program was phased over to permanent government agencies.
The unemployment rate for this group stood at 5.2 percent by the end of the year.
Mandatory listing of job openings with the employment service by Federal contractors resulted in more jobs for veterans.
The number of veterans placed on jobs under the mandatory listing provision increased by more than 30 percent over the previous year.
Disabled veterans were given special attention, including skill training at more Veterans Administration hospitals and an increase in the number of disabled veterans—from 60 to 150—working with their peers.
Most of the categorical programs under the Manpower Development and Training Act and Economic Opportunity Act were being phased out or absorbed under the new Comprehensive Employment and Training Act during the fiscal year.
Since the mix of programs is now determined by the local prime sponsors, many of the former activities continue, but usually under different names.
For example, the Neighborhood Youth Corps is no longer a national program, although a variety of programs directed at youth are still operating.
Groundwork was laid to administer programs under CETA aimed at special target groups.
A national office of Indian manpower programs was established in the Manpower Administration for programs authorized under Title IlIl.
Draft regulations for the program were published in the Federal Register June 26.
1974, and training of large numbers of potential prime sponsors was begun.
Regulations were drafted for the migrant program, and a departmental committee was established to develop a strategy for providing assistance to farmworkers.
Plans for an offender rehabilitation program were developed.
There will be a series of demonstration and model ex-offender projects in each region.
Steps were taken to coordinate allocations for rehabilitation programs through the Comprehensive Offender Program Effort (COPE), a cooperative arrangement among the Departments of Labor and Health, Education, and Welfare and the Law Enforcement Administration of the Justice Department.
A program to provide subsidized part-time employment for elderly.
The $10 million appropriated for fiscal 1974 was distributed among five national older worker organizations, three States and four territorial governments.
Work is limited to community projects involving conservation or community betterment and beautification.
Although the Emergency Employment Act (EEA).
Efforts were concentrated on moving participants into regular public service jobs.
Experience under PEP has shown the program could be administered with very little administrative cost (less than 2 percent).
Consequently, Title Il of CETA, authorizing the establishment of public service transitional jobs, specifies that 90 percent of the funds for this type of employment be for wages and employee benefits.
The programs are designed with a view toward developing new careers, or providing opportunities for career advancement or continued training.
PEP jobs met service needs, such as public works, transportation, education, law enforcement, health care, recreation and social services.
Participants showed a marked increase in earnings in the 6 months after leaving PEP over the 6-month period prior to entry.
The EEA also provided funds for public service programs on more than 200 Indian reservations.
These programs had only a limited impact because the unemployment problem among Indians is so great.
However, CETA contains special provisions to establish a comprehensive manpower training and employment program for Indians.
With the phasing out of the Public Employment Program, manpower planners and administrators are drawing on their experience with the program to make the transition to new CETAfunded public service jobs.
A redesign of the WIN Il program was initiated during the fiscal year.
The registration function was shifted from the welfare agency to the manpower agency.
The purpose of the WIN program is to move welfare recipients into productive jobs.
During the year, some 353,000 persons became WiN participants, receiving manpower, job counseling, or placement services.
More than 178,000 were placed in unsubsidized jobs.
Another major accomplishment during the year was the collocation of WIN staffs of the Department of Labor and the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, the two agencies with the responsibility for running the program.
The collocation was completed at the national and regional levels, as well as in many State and local offices.
This new concept not only puts the two departmental WIN staffs in the same physical location but also integrates the staffs programmatically to improve performance.
To insure that WIN program dollars are put where they will realize the best return, the WiN benefit expenditure approach was developed during the fiscal year and applied to fiscal 1975 allocations.
A type of cost-benefit analysis, this system uses a formula to allocate funds where they will be used most effectively.
It provides incentives to improve the timeliness and accuracy of WIN reporting.
Job Corps was required by budgetary restrictions to serve a reduced number of young people in fiscal 1974: 46,000 compared with 48,000 in fiscal 1973.
It concentrated on improving program quality and introducing new training and education techniques.
These helped Job Corps respond to changing societal demands.
A record 93-percent placement rate.
Of all terminating enrollees available for placement, 68 percent were placed in jobs, 19 percent returned to school, and 6 percent enlisted in the Armed Forces.
Job Corps' unique union training program, operated in 35 of the 65 centers, achieved an even higher placement rate for its graduates—97 percent placed in union apprenticeship jobs with an average hourly starting wage of $4.
Award of more than 4,000 General Education Development (GED) certificates in its high school equivalency examination program.
Development of plans for instituting nontraditional training for women leading to union apprenticeship jobs in carpentry, painting, bricklaying, and cement masonry and plastering.
One nontraditional training program, welding, had already begun at the Excelsior Springs Center in Missouri.
In a further effort to expand training opportunities for women, Job Corps laid the groundwork in fiscal 1974 to convert several traditionally all-male centers into coeducational training centers during fiscal 1975.
The first of these conversions will be the Angell Civilian Conservation Center in Oregon, where union instructors train enrollees in the construction trades.
Continued dissemination of educational materials and techniques developed especially for Job Corps' enrollment population, but with important features applicable to other institutions designed to help disadvantaged people.
These include "Guidelines for a Bilingual/Multicultural Program," distributed to Job Corps centers this past year and already requested by numerous school systems now developing programs for students whose first language is Spanish.
Another Job Corps project now shared with school systems and many State and local health agencies is the film "Sickle Cell Anemia and Sickle Cell Trait."
The 33-minute film, produced by Job Corps as part of its health education program, received the CINE Golden Eagle award this year and is now in great demand from those outside the program.
An interagency agreement for operation of civilian conservation centers was revised to reflect the provisions of CETA and refine the interrelationships of the respective departments, i.e., Labor, Agriculture, and Interior.
As a further step in the overall decentralization effort, Job Corps contracting authority was delegated to the Assistant Regional Directors for Manpower.
As the result of a cooperative agreement between State Apprenticeship agencies and the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, a new reporting system was implemented during the fiscal year.
It will present a more accurate picture of the composition of apprenticeship programs.
Complete statistics from this computerized system were not available at year's end.
However, figures based on the federally serviced workload during fiscal 1974 indicate a slight increase in minority apprentices.
Of the 184, 178 apprentices registered at the close of the year, about 15.6 percent were minorities, compared with 14.8 percent at the beginning of the fiscal year.
The Bureau assisted industry sponsors in establishing and maintaining about 500 journeyman or skill-upgrading programs.
Over 17,000 workers received an average of 550 hours of training to improve their skill levels.
The first national apprenticeship standards for a 1-year term of apprenticeship were developed and registered.
They covered the occupations of orthotic and prosthetic technicians.
An outgrowth of a national conference on "New Initiatives in Apprenticeship" was the reactivation of the Federal Committee on Apprenticeship, an advisory group to the Secretary of Labor.
Inactive for more than 4 years, the 25-member committee now includes four blacks, three women, and a Mexican American.
During the fiscal year, about $5.5 billion in unemployment insurance (Ul) benefits was paid to approximately 6.7 million individuals.
Nearly 220.000 were ex-servicemen and women, assisted during their transition to civilian employment.
Under the Trade Expansion Act, readjustment allowances of $11.6 million were paid to about 7,700 workers affected by trade concessions in 27 States.
As a result of 45 major disasters in 32 States, nearly 16,500 unemployed workers received over $4 million in Disaster Unemployment Assistant (DUA).
The Disaster Relief Act of 1974, which continued the DUA program and extended the period during which allowances may be paid to 1 year, was enacted May 22, 1974.
During a large part of the year, there was special concern about the possible unemployment impact of the energy shortage.
Department of Labor data showed some temporary unemployment attributable to the energy shortage, particularly in Michigan and other automobile-producing States.
To achieve adeguate benefit duration.
In addition, the Congress enacted a series of amendments to the Federal-State Extended Compensation Act of 1970, permitting States to pay longer benefits when specified economic conditions were met.
During the fiscal year, approximately $304 million was paid in extended benefits during periods of high unemployment.
State legislatures strengthened the Ul system in several ways.
In two States, Ul protection was provided to State government workers.
Six States repealed special disqualification provisions for pregnancy, while in four other States this provision was voided because of legal decisions.
Eleven States enacted increases in the maxium weekly benefit amount while five others changed the basis of payment to provide for higher maximum payments.
Cost model studies were completed in all States and jurisdictions.
Resulting information will be used to determine budget needs more accurately in each State based on improved operations.
Outstanding progress was made in improving the promptness of first-level appeals decisions.
In March 1974, 41 States met the Secretary of Labor's standard for prompt decisions while in July 1972, only 13 States met this standard.
The Unemployment Insurance Service developed guidelines and provided training to facilitate State agency participation in making payments to individuals participating in manpower training under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973.
A 1-vear research and training scholarship was established to recognize an employee of the Federal-State Ul system.
Results of research and development projects were utilized in providing technical assistance materials to CETA prime sponsors in such areas as youth guidance, counseling and coaching, and job development and relations with employers.
How discharged Armed Forces medics can be employed in hospitals and other health institutions at their highest level of skill.
How supported employment projects can ease transition to full-time employment for severely disadvantaged former prisoners and drug abusers.
The role of licensing as a barrier to equal employment opportunity.
Plans were made for a major evaluation study of the impact of participation in CETA programs on postprogram income.
The study will follow a national sample of enrollees in CETA programs administered by State and local governments.
Other evaluations launched include a study of the Work Incentive Program and the migrant/seasonal farmworker programs.
The latter was transferred to the Department of Labor from the Office of Economic Opportunity.
Staff evaluations completed during the year concerned the pilot Comprehensive Manpower Program, the Ironworkers' affirmative action training program in the construction industry, the high school equivalency program of the migrant/seasonal farmworker program, and the mandatory food stamp work registration program administered by the employment service.
The Manpower Administration funded 13 new institutional grant projects in colleges and universities to develop capability for training staffs for State and local planners and deliverers of manpower services.
The International Manpower Institute for Training and Education conducted two international manpower seminars during the fiscal year.
Policy officials and technicíans of developing countries were briefed or trained in specialized areas of manpower planning and forecasting and the organization, management, and operation of manpower and training programs and institutions.
A major reorganization of the Manpower Administration's national office was accomplished during the year to provide a more efficient and manageable structure for running its programs.
Through reduction and consolidation of organizational components, all the various manpower training programs were brought together under a single unit, the Office of Manpower Development Programs.
Establishment of the Office of Field Direction and Management reinforced the'commitment to a strong, single line of authority to the field and to decentralization of authority to Assistant Regional Directors for Manpower.
The reorganization was facilitated by the fact that, for the first time in its history, the Manpower Administration had all organizational components housed in one building.
The move of approximately 1,600 employees, who had been located in 10 separate buildings, was accomplished in the fall of 1973.
Home rule" for the District of Columbia provided for the transfer of the D.C. Manpower Administration to the local government, where the mayor could exercise control.
With respect to the D.C. public employment service, the Secretary of Labor maintains the same relationship as he does with a State's employment service.
In November 1973, the Office of Equal Employment Opportunity became part of the newly formed Office of Investigation and Compliance, which also contains the Special Review Staff.
Its function continues to be to coordinate efforts, on behalf of the Assistant Secretary for Manpower, toward equal opportunity in manpower programs without regard to race, sex, age, religion or national origin.
Under the decentralized administration, the regional offices conduct complaint investigations and compliance reviews, give technical assistance to State employment security offices and sponsors, and conduct training with regional staff and Staté officials.
The national office's role is now focused on giving technical assistance to regional staff and State and local officials to help implement an effective equal employment program through the prime sponsors.
To assist in this effort, the Office of Investigation and Compliance developed training materials, a film on the complaint function, and a training module to assist national, regional, and State staff.
The highlight of a busy year for the Labor-Management Services Administration (LMSA) was, by almost any yardstick, getting ready for the new pension law.
At the beginning of the fiscal year, a task force was established to monitor the development of the new law, to prepare for the department's responsibilities for administering significant portions of it and to supply frequent reports to a steering committee established in the Office of the Under Secretary.
The landmark legislation, a substantial new building block in the Nation's social structure, stood at the threshold of enactment as the fiscal year drew to a close.
It is complex and provides new assurances to millions of workers in private industry that they will receive the pensions to which they are entitled and which they have earned.
Getting ready included following closely the progress of the legislation in Congress and estimatin field and national office staffing and funding requirements.
LMSA also attended to its other responsibilities during the year.
These included assistance in improving labor-management relations and enforcing and securing voluntary compliance in connection with laws regulating veterans' reemployment rights, union activities, and employee welfare and pension plan disclosures.
LMSA participated in investigations supporting the President's Program Against Organized Crime.
In addition, LMSA continued to administer key provisions of Executive Order 11491, as amended, regulating labor-management relations in the Federal service.
There were 57,423 active labor organizations with reports on file under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) as of June 30.
LMSA completed 4,895 LMRDA investigations during the year, including 185 involving union elections.
The Department instituted 48 civil actions under the Act in Federal district courts.
Sixty individuals were charged with criminal violations of the LMRDA in indictments or criminal informations filed in Federal district courts, including 9 as a result of LMSA participation in Organized Crime Strike Forces in 17 major cities.
Fifty-five persons, including some indicted in previous years, were convicted of LMRDA violations: 3 were acquitted.
LMSA received annual financial reports required under the Standards of Conduct, Section 18 of Executive Order 11491, from 3.254 active Federal labor organizations.
Of the 863 Standards of Conduct investigations LMSA completed during the year, 12 involved Federal union elections and 826 involved delinquent and deficient reports.
Some 190.000 active employee benefit plans were on file with the Department under the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act (WPPDA).
Of the 888 WPPDA investigations LMSA completed.
Under Executive Order 11491.
The Assistant Secretary also decides eligibility questions on national consultation rights and questions concerning handling of grievances and arbitration under existing contracts.
During the year, 1.244 cases involving representation petitions, unfair labor practice complaints and grievance-arbitration applications were initiated in LMSA's 24 area offices.
During that time.
1.088 cases were closed.
In the same period, 332 representation elections were supervised by LMSA field personnel.
The Assistant Secretary issued 125 decisions based upon records of formal hearings conducted before hearing officers or Administrative Law Judges.
In addition, the Assistant Secretary made determinations on 103 requests for a review of actions taken by LMSA Assistant Regional Directors.
The number of complaint cases filed dropped to 3,239 in fiscal year 1974 from 4,376 the previous year.
This was a 26 percent decrease and reflects the fact that total separations from military service fell some 17 percent to an estimated 500,000 from an estimated 604.000 during the 1973 fiscal year.
It also appears that a slightly smaller percentage of the returning veterans sought to exercise reemployment rights with preservice employers.
This was because they did not leave jobs to enter military service or because they preferred and were able to take advantage of other employment or educational opportunities.
Increased field staff expertise in the reemployment rights program, along with the drop in incoming complaint cases, led to a reduction in the backlog of pending complaint cases from 1,376 to 825 during fiscal year 1974.
Some 59 percent of the new veterans participated in the referral procedure established in cooperation with the Department of Defense.
Each participating veteran was sent basic information about reemployment rights assistance and other services available to veterans through the Department of Labor, About 42 percent of these veterans indicated that they had preservice employers, and those employers were advised of the basic provisions of the reemployment rights law.
As a result, many veterans were reinstated in their jobs and accorded their other reemployment rights without further action by the Office of Veterans' Reemployment Rights (OVRR).
As before, copies of the referral forms received by OVRR were made available to the Manpower Administration's Veterans Employment Service (VES).
During fiscal year 1974, there was substantial stability in the relations between labor and management The Federal government continued its policy of encouraging resolution of labor-management disputes with a minimum of direct participation.
This policy was followed with regard to negotiations in key industries including: automobile and farm implement manufacturing.
Federal action was necessary in only two disputes when mediation failed to produce settlements.
On two occasions Presidential Emergency Boards were appointed under the Railway Labor Act.
One Board investigated and reported on a dispute between the Long Island Rail Road and its employees represented by the Brotherhood of Railway Signalmen.
The other did the same in connection with the dispute between the National Railway Labor Conference and the Sheet Metal Workers International Association.
During the fiscal year, "early warning" reports covering negotiations which could affect the national interest were provided to the Secretary and other key Government officials.
Staff assistance was provided to the Presidential Emergency Boards established under the Railway Labor Act.
In addition, the Department continued its program of assistance to State and local governments and public employee organizations in establishing their own procedures for resolving labor-management relations problems.
Upon request, the Department provided technical assistance, information and data services, training and conference activities to the participants in the non-Federal public sector.
It conducted special training seminars for newly appointed Public Employee Relations Board members, for labor and management representatives, and for third party neutrals.
It also provided technical assistance to a number of State and local jurisdictions in drafting public employee rules and regulations, and in the conduct of representation elections.
The Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964 provides that the Secretary of Labor certify that arrangements are made to protect the interests of employees affected by urban mass transportation projects assisted by the Department of Transportation.
During fiscal year 1974, the Department of Labor certified 160 applications for assistance under the Urban Mass Transportation Act, involving total project values of more than $2.5 billion.
Policy recommendations were formulated during the year on several important labor-management relations issues through a continuous review of legislative developments and a supportive program of analysis and research.
The most significant development in this area was the pending passage of pension reform legislation.
The policy development staff analyzed, provided technical comment on, and aided in formulating Department policy on the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
This legislation is designed primarily to ensure that more workers will receive the private pensions they have been promised and have earned.
The legislation, provides for expanded reporting and disclosure, new vesting, funding, and fiduciary standards, insurance against plan termination, and individual retirement accounts.
Other important policy issues included the extension of federally protected collective bargaining rights for such groups as nonprofit hospital workers and farmworkers.
The research staff published "Administrative Expenses of Welfare and Pension Plans." "Union Status and Benefits of Retirees," "State Civil Service Employee Associations" and a "Study of Pension Plan Terminations.
The latter was done in cooperation with the Treasury Department.
LMSA financed a study of "Coverage and Vesting of Full-Time Employees under Private Retirement Plans." which was published jointly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and the Treasury Department.
LMSA arranged with the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the collection and maintenance of public sector agreement files and for an extensive analysis of State and local public sector agreements.
Funds were supplied to the Bureau of the Census to collect data on public sector labor relations at the State and local level.
Nine contracts were awarded for research on various problems and aspects of labor relations in the public sector.
The Employment Standards Administration (ESA) received important new responsibilities and was reorganized to do its job more effectively during the 1974 fiscal year.
The reorganization began at the beginning of the fiscal year.
A key feature was strengthening and placing greater emphasis upon program planning, review, and accountability for ESA managers.
In addition, a National Executive Board and Regional Executive Boards were established to develop and review policy and to serve -as the focal point for organization communications.
The Wage and Hour Division and the Office of Workmen's Compensation Programs (later changed to the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs) were established as separate major program organizations.
Two pieces of major legislation which significantly affected ESA's responsibilities were signed into law during the fiscal year.
Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act established an affirmative action program for the employment and advancement of qualified handicapped individuals working on Federal contracts and subcontracts exceeding $2,500.
The 1974 amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) increased the minimum wage, strengthened child labor provisions, and extended coverage under both the minimum wage and overtime provisions.
The amendments also extended age discrimination protection to Federal.
State.
These amendments directly affect standards of employment for millions of workers and require a significantly expanded enforcement effort.
ESA's Wage and Hour Division is responsible for enforcing a number of labor laws, including the Fair Labor Standards Act, which includes minimum wage, overtime pay, and child labor provisions.
During the fiscal year, 60.400 compliance actions disclosed $65 million in minimum wage and overtime pay due to about 327,000 workers.
Of this total.
About 246,000 workers received more than $38 million in minimum wage and overtime back wages.
The major reason for the difference between the total money found due to employees and the amount actually paid is refusal of some employers to pay back wages in cases considered unsuitable for litigation by the Labor Department.
Of course, in such cases any employee has the right to institute private and independent action for the recovery of back wages due, and substantial amounts of wages recovered by employees in this way are not reflected in the Department's statistics.
In child labor, 14,698 minors were found illegally employed.
An evaluation of the school-supervised Work Experience and Career Exploration Program (WECEP) clearly indicated that the program did not interfere with the participants' schooling, health, or well being.
The program was extended until June 1975 in order to study areas not previously included in the evaluation.
Fiscal year 1974 was ESA's first full year enforcing the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act.
The 1.200 crew leader investigations conducted by Wage-Hour compliance officers indicated that approximately 70 percent of the crew leaders were violating the law.
Although voluntary compliance was achieved in most cases, civil actions were filed for the first time against violators.
Final judgments were entered against three crew leaders, with five other cases still pending.
Investigations under government contract labor standards laws, such as the Service Contract Act and Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, disclosed $5 million in back wages due to 18,800 workers, compared with $1.5 million found due to 7,000 workers in fiscal 1973.
Almost $3 million in back wages was paid to 12,000 workers in fiscal 1974, compared with $1 million paid approximately 6,300 workers in fiscal 1973.
The Service Contract Act gives prevailing wage, fringe benefit and other labor standards protection to nearly a half million service employees on Federal service contracts.
Federal agencies requested wage and fringe benefit determinations for 25,699 contracts in fiscal 1974, a 17 percent increase over the previous fiscal year.
At the end of the fiscal year, 4.155 determinations were in effect under the Act.
Davis-Bacon and Related Acts provide prevailing wage.
During the year.
Of these.
16.681 were project determinations and 2,184 were general determinations.
General determinations are published in the Federal Register and may be used by any contracting agency with an appropriate project.
Project determinations are issued to the contracting agency.
Wage and Hour policy is to increase the utilization of general determinations as adequate data permit, reducing the number of decision pages as well as the total number of decisions, while at the same time increasing the coverage of decisions.
Interest in labor standards at the state level continued to increase, with State legislatures passing some 665 labor standards laws.
Most frequently sought was assistance on worker problems with private employment agencies.
Assistance was also provided to several Federal agencies, the International Labor Organization, unions, employers, and others.
Though much remains to be done, ESA made significant contributions toward making employment opportunities equal for all workers regardless of race, color, sex, age.
Underpayments of $20,600,000 to almost 33,000 workers, nearly all women, were found.
About 16,800 workers received approximately $6,850,000 in back wages.
In the first major settlement to cover managerial workers since the equal pay law was amended in 1972, a landmark agreement was reached between the American Telephone and Telegraph Co. and the Federal government in May 1974.
The company agreed to restore some $7 million to 7,000 managerial employees who had been discriminated against because of sex.
The agreement was signed by representatives of the Departments of Labor and Justice and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
A similar agreement had been reached in January 1973, between the government and AT&T for non-management employees.
In June 1974.
This was the first decision by the Supreme Court under the Act.
The Supreme Court took cognizance of the principle that work need not be identical in every respect for the Equal Pay Act to apply.
Jqbs need only be substantially equal.
A major thrust of ESA's Women's Bureau during the year was encouraging the movement of women workers into more skilled and responsible jobs.
To this end.
In addition.
Ind. to place disadvantaged women in skilled jobs in order to alleviate their economic plight.
Other efforts were directed toward assisting women minority group members, the aged, handicapped, and offenders.
Technical and advisory assistance was provided to various organizations and to information and referral centers serving these women.
Efforts to help women of racial and ethnic minority groups included participation in numerous meetings and conferences focusing on their problems.
Union women have long been encouraged to organize into groups to consider their special problems.
As a result.
In Washington.
D.C..
This group meets regularly with Bureau staff members to discuss problems of women workers and the role of women in unions.
In the international field.
ESA worked with other government agencies in the preliminary planning for International Women's Year in 1975.
Preliminary plans were made with representatives of the Women's and Minor's Bureau of Japan for a joint study on women in the two countries.
Concerned with the coordination of matters affecting women.
Regional committees were established by the Department's regional offices.
The Committee was instrumental in amending Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) regulations to provide that prime sponsors should consider women as members of State and local Manpower Planning Councils.
The Secretary also established the Secretary's Advisory Committee on Women to inform him of the needs of women and how the Department can assist women.
A number of major recommendations were made during the year.
The Committee was involved in various activities including the preparation of CETA guidelines and regulations.
The Women's Bureau serves as Secretariat for the Committee.
Within ESA, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC) ensures equal employment opportunity for minority group members and women consonant with its mandate under Executive Order of 11246, as amended.
Under this order.
Various Federal agencies are assigned responsibility for enforcement of the Executive Order.
During the year.
Revised Order No. 14.
To assure proper implementation.
Federal contract compliance agencies conducted over 23,000 compliance reviews to enforce the executive order during fiscal 1974.
About 15.000 reviews of supply and service firms were conducted.
Over 8,000 reviews were made in the construction industry.
During the same period approximately 700 notices were sent to contractors.
In some cases contract approvals or awards were deferred pending correction of deficiencies.
The development of hometown plans in the construction industry proceeded.
These plans are designed to achieve equal employment opportunity through voluntary agreements among labor, management, and community groups.
Seven hometown plans were developed during the year, and two were imposed by the Department.
There were 70 construction compliance plans in effect at the end of the year.
Sixty-one audits were made of these plans.
They indicated that most plans have been successful and that continued support of the program is warranted.
Mandatory hiring goals were imposed in 21 localities where participants failed to show the required goodfaith efforts to meet employment obligations for certain crafts.
A major agreement was reached during the year with nine steel companies and the United Steelworkers of America to provide egual employment opportunities and back wages for thousands of workers discriminated against because of race or sex.
The agreement.
Spanish-surnamed and women employees at 249 plants.
Efforts to improve opportunities and protect rights of older workers under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) met with increasing success in 1974.
Compliance actions through the wage and hour program resulted in damages of $6,300,000 found due to about 1.600 individuals.
Approximately $2,500,000 was paid to 600 individuals.
In the largest settlement ever reached under this Act.
Western Operations.
Inc..
The agreement called for reinstatement of 120 of the employees.
Another indication of the Department's commitment to provide egual employment opportunity for older workers was the suit filed in June 1974 against two railroad companies.
The Department is seeking more than $20 million for some 300 present and former employees of the railroads.
ESA is responsible for the administration of Federal workers' compensation programs through the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP), which administers the Federal Employees' Compensation Act and related laws: the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers Compensation Act and its various extensions: the Department's workers' compensation program activities in other areas within the private sector.
A total of 123.009 injuries was reported under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act during the year.
New claims for compensation rose to 31,025, up from 28,231 in fiscal 1973.
At the year's end, 32,730 cases were being compensated on the OwCP periodic payment rolls.
Benefits paid under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act amounted to $270.628.302, or 24 percent more than the previous fiscal year.
New injuries reported during the year under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and its various extensions increased to 181.525.
Lost-time injuries increased from 30,222 in fiscal 1973 to 41,585 in 1974.
These reflect changes brought about by 1972 amendments to the Act.
The amendments extended coverage to workers performing maritime work at land installations adjoining, and used in connection with.
During fiscal 1974, 63,489, or 47 percent.
Maximum benefits increased under the Longshore Act on October 1, 1973, from $167.00 per week to $210.54 per week, the latter representing 150 percent of the national average weekly wage applicable for this period.
A total of 36,890 black lung claims was reported under the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act (black lung program) from July 1, 1973, through June 30.
Benefits paid under this program amounted to $1,276,000, of which $710,000 was for medical benefits.
Title IV of the Act requires the Secretary of Labor to determine "responsible" coal mine operators, who will be liable for payments to disabled coal miners and their survivors.
These payments by responsible operators began January 1, 1974.
Operators are required to guarantee benefit payments by obtaining an approved amendment endorsement to their insurance policy with a private carrier or State agency, or by self-insuring with the Department of Labor.
Where no responsible operator can be identified, the Department will assume responsibility for payment of benefits.
ESA continued to provide technical assistance to the States on workers' compensation matters and participated in the development of the Administration's White Paper on Workers' Compensation, which was released in May 1974.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) made significant progress in each of its programs to protect American workers during the 1974 fiscal year.
Improvement of the work environment in this country requires a combination of governmental enforcement actions and voluntary cooperation by those involved in the workplae.
OSHA's activities during the fiscal year were designed to enhance both.
Among things OSHA focused on were.
Increased enforcement, with more workplace inspections.
Development and refinement of job safety and health standards.
Encouragement of the federal-state partnership to make the program broader and more effective.
More attention to federal employee safety and health.
Promotion of voluntary compliance by employers and employees with the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.
Though the effects of each of these activities are measurable, there are less tangible results that have potentially important implications.
These began to become apparent in FY 1974.
Evidence of increased awareness and concern for the work environment emerged in many different ways.
Unions increased their job safety and health training, and employer associations assumed an active role in informing their members about provisions of the Act.
In this, OSHA served as a catalyst for increased attention to the problem of workplace hazards in America.
Federal OSHA inspectors made 78,082 workplace visits in fiscal 1974.
They issued 54,960 citations, which alleged 292,069 violations of job safety and health standards.
Proposed penalties as a result of these inspections totalled $6,971,651.
This was an increase of almost 75 percent from the FY 1973 inspection total.
The investigations included 54.879 initial visits.
Also included were 11.018 repeat visits and 12.185 follow-up appearances to check on abatement of violations alleged in earlier inspections.
Major inspection of the Metro subway system being constructed in Washington, D.C. was carried out by a special task force of compliance officers drawn from various parts of the Nation.
OSHA increased its enforcement activities by adopting measures to remove routine administrative and clerical responsibilities from compliance officers Efficient scheduling of workplace visits was given more emphasis Thus.
In addition, compliance officers received permission to issue citations at the work-site under certain circumstances in order to facilitate compliance and promote due process in enforcement procedures.
OSHA's standards activities placed increased emphasis on the development of health standards at the same time that safety standards were being drawn up.
In response to the threat posed by toxic substances in the workplace, OSHA issued standards limiting exposure to 14 carcinogens used in various industries The regulations prescribe work practices and controls designed to protect employees from the harmful effects of these substances.
In January 1974, OSHA was informed of the possible link between employee exposure to vinyl chloride and a rare form of liver cancer, angiosarcoma.
Within four months.
These actions demonstrated OSHA's capability for responding quickly to the discovery of dangerous workplace situations.
A joint project was begun with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health to improve upon the existing health standards now applicable to nearly 400 toxic substances.
These improvements will add work practices.
Another standards proposal was the telecommunications regulation developed by a 28-member committee of union and management representatives.
This group organized on its own initiative to assist OSHA in setting standards for that industry.
New rules for protecting employees working in tunnels and shafts were proposed.
A proposal to require guarding of farm field equipment.
OSHA further proposed a rule to require rollover protective structures on new agricultural tractors purchased after August 31.
Standards covering industrial slings were proposed.
Several hundred revisions were made to the consensus standards adopted by OSHA as its original set of rules.
Those regulations considered unnecessary for employee protection.
A change in the recordkeeping requirements authorizing employee access to occupational injury and illness logs compiled by employers was also proposed.
During the year, standards advisory committees met to consider regulations in the following areas: construction.
A committee on hazardous material labeling was being formed as fiscal year 1974 came to a close.
A primary objective of the Occupational Safety and Health Act is to encourage States to administer and enforce their own job safety and health programs.
In fiscal year 1974 OSHA truly became a Federal-State endeavor as 14 more State plans were approved, bringing the total to 25.
The 25 States included more than one-half of all the workers protected by the Act.
OSHA provided the States with $20.399.482 in operational grants to aid in implementing their plans.
This constitutes one-half the cost of the State programs.
The 25 States will augment the Federal enforcement effort with 1.927 compliance officers as their plans become operational.
By the end of the year.
25 State plans had been approved.
19 were in the review process.
5 plans had been withdrawn by the respective States.
1 plan was rejected, and 6 States or jurisdictions had not submitted plans.
To insure that these programs provide worker protection at least as effective as that of the Federal effort, OSHA adopted a system of monitoring State programs which begins immediately upon approval of a plan.
Monitoring is based upon three factors: quarterly and annual reports on compliance and standards activity, a variety of regional monitoring procedures, and evaluations of complaints concerning State plan administration.
Federal enforcement authority is resumed when State actions result in a program less effective than the Federal model.
OSHA's training and educational efforts are twofold: to instruct Federal and State compliance officers so they can provide fair and competent enforcement and to educate employers and employees in their rights and responsibilities under the law.
During the year, OSHA's training instititute in Rosemont, Illinois, graduated its 5000th student.
The number of people completing job safety and health training there was almost evenly divided between the two target populations.
Contracts with the private sector boosted training capabilities.
A $3 million contract was awarded the National Safety Council to provide job safety and -health education to more than 100,000 employers and employees of small and medium-sized businesses at no cost to the recipients.
The National American Indian Safety Council, Inc., received a grant of $105,000 to provide instruction on 90 reservations, and the University of Wisconsin School of Workers agreed to develop and conduct training for approximately 1500 employees and union representatives at a cost to OSHA of $305,173.
Vital to the effectiveness of the Federal-State job safety and health endeavor is the elimination of duplication of effort in this field among various Federal agencies.
To eliminate duplication of effort between OSHA and other agencies acting under specific statutory authority to reduce work-related hazards, and to avoid gaps in coverage, OSHA signed agreements with eight Federal agencies in FY 1974.
These agreements define and delineate respective areas of responsibility for worker protection.
The accords cover such areas as general enforcement authority of the agency, procedural arrangements for handling complaints relating to occupational safety and health, cooperation in standards development, and exchange of training and information.
In addition, OSHA accepted the Atomic Energy Commission's assertion of jurisdiction over occupational safety and health matters in AEC-owned and leased facilities.
To strengthen safety and health programs for Federal employees, OSHA proposed new guidelines and a revision of Executive Order 11612 on the responsibility of Federal agency heads for employee protection.
The revised executive order would require sufficient funding for safety and health programs, allow periodic inspections.
The revision also would require the Secretary of Labor to provide stronger leadership and guidance to Federal agencies.
The first national compliance agreement with an employer was concluded with the American Can Company on April 4.
The company promised to reduce employee exposure to noise at 83 container plants across the country by December 1.
The company also committed its resources to developing feasible engineering and administrative controls at two engineering centers.
As the controls are generated.
American Can promised to continue to provide and ensure the use of personal protective equipment.
A similar agreement was concluded with the wood products industry on May 28.
1974 Three associations in that industry agreed to develop and implement feasible engineering controls to reduce excessive noise in the workplace The associations agreed to continue to recommend administrative controls and personal protective equipment to their members These agreements have increased OSHA-industry cooperation on worker protection.
Hopefully, they are the harbinger of more OSHA-industry cooperative efforts.
OSHA was reorganized in FY 1974.
Three associate assistant secretary positions were created to oversee national.
The standards development office was changed and strengthened to reflect the growing emphasis on health standards.
In light of the evolving nature of the program.
In addition, authorized compliance officer staffing increased to 800.
During fiscal year 1974.
Evaluation.
Activities of the Office of Policy Development were directed primarily toward developing legislative initiatives and providing policy advice to the Secretary's Office on a broad range of subjects.
These included: special unemployment insurance and manpower programs relating to the energy crisis: workers' compensation: pension reform, workers' rights of privacy: national health insurance: minimum wage.
The Office also provided staff assistance to the Secretary's Office in connection with the Cost of Living Council.
The Office of Program Analysis and Special Studies was responsible for coordinating the Department's internal planning efforts.
The Office helped provide necessary staff support to the Department's Program and Budget Review Committee to assure an intensive and objective review of the several policy issues and budget proposals submitted for consideration by the Department's program agencies.
The Office of Research continued its role in planning and coordinating agency activities throughout the Department.
The research policy committee was responsible for a research clearinghouse and for prior review of all potential Department research awards.
The research staff was engaged in two major areas: (1) the effect of the Employment Service in the labor market and (2) how unemployment insurance affects the behavior of the unemployed.
The Office of Evaluation continued its role of performing aggregate analysis of Departmental program effectiveness and coordinating evaluation done in the agencies.
The Office primarily performed scientific analysis of Departmental programs.
During the year.
The Office completed studies in the program areas of PEP.
Other studies completed involved the areas of minimum wage: cost effectiveness of the ES Job Bank systems; effects of manpower training programs on the black/white wage differential; and impact of the Black Lung Program on prices and output in the coai industry.
The Office also was involved in several research projects in the area of job search and job matching for the purpose of developing labor exchange models needed to evaluate the impact of the ES and UI systems.
The activities of the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the 1974 fiscal year were affected heavily by new legislation on manpower revenue sharing.
Other major developments affecting BLS included the continuing revision of the Consumer Price Index (CPl), assessments of wage-price behavior under the economic stabilization program and.
This triggered needs for better petroleum pricing and assessments of the impact of the oil embargo on employment.
Shortly after the enactment of CETA, the Bureau directed its attention to development of improved local area unemployment estimates.
The new procedures sought to assure greater accuracy, comparability from State to State, and consistency with estimates of national unemployment.
Since the allocations under CETA are based in part on these estimates of local area unemployment, the measures received a great deal of attention from State and local officials.
Several governors voiced concern about the wisdom of changing estimating procedures.
The State of New Jersey even challenged the legality of the new measure in the courts.
At the end of the fiscal year, this case was still pending.
Meanwhile the estimating procedures were implemented throughout the country in accord with the legislative reguirement that local estimates be based on the criteria used by the BLS.
The long-term revision of the CPI, scheduled for completion in 1977, continued to receive attention inside the Bureau.
Considerable interest also developed outside the Bureau over the decisions on consumer unit and housing concepts.
The Bureau proposed to expand the family coverage of the index to all urban consumer units, from urban wage earners and clerical workers alone, and to change the rental component to a flow-of-services concept.
Trade union leaders, fearing that the new concept would understate the rate of inflation, argued strongly for the retention of the CPI for urban workers because of its importance in' collective bargaining.
The issue was also examined by the Congress.
As a result of further discussions, the Bureau decided to publish two indexes in FY 1977: one based on all urban consumer units and the other, like the present CPi, based on urban wage earners and clerical workers.
The collection of the nationwide Consumer Expenditure Survey.
The wage and price offices used considerable staff resources in assessing the behavior of wages and prices under the economic stabilization program, which ended on June 30, 1974.
The Office of Data Analysis instituted a quarterly report to the regional offices on activities in Federal-State cooperative programs.
This method of data collection, which encourages the production of State and area data, has been of more than usual interest.
There is growing demand, stimulated by the Federal Government, for State and local statistical data for the allocation of Federal money under revenue sharing, as well as for development of programs to be implemented or expanded by the use of these funds.
Two Federal-State programs, however, were changed considerably during the year.
The Job Openings Statistics Program was eliminated because it was not providing data useful in the operations of the State employment agencies.
The Occupational Employment Survey program, which was decentralized to the States, no longer yields national data.
Duríng the year the Bureau adopted the new area outlines of Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA) boundaries.
The accuracy of the Bureau's petroleum prices came under heavy surveillance in fiscal 1974..
The Bureau renewed its efforts.
These efforts proved successful.
The Wholesale Price Index was revised to take account of the improved petroleum component.
The Bureau contributed to the preparation of a report for the Secretary to send to Congress on the economic and manpower implications of energy shortages.
Attention was given to defining direct and indirect employment effects and to refining estimates of demand elasticity.
The Bureau prepared estimates of the effect of the energy crisis on employment, hours, and labor turnover.
The Bureau completed the first survey to produce annual data measuring occupational injuries and illnesses in American industry.
During the year, BLS increased its emphasis on expanding and improving wages and industrial relations data, in response to urgent needs generated by economic conditions.
This emphasis was justified by events with the removal of wage-price controls in the last quarter of the fiscal year.
In particular, the compietion of a computer-oriented system permitted publication of new data series on collective bargaining settiements.
These have proved vastly superior to previous data for understanding current wage determinations.
Further improvements in format and content were made in Current Wage Developments.
A special article.
Major Collective Bargaining Developments—A Quarter-Century Review." in the February 1974 issue was widely quoted and republished by private organizations.
Additional and updated background material was added to the 10 wage chronology bulletins.
Work continued on development of a General Wage Index which will provide an economy-wide measure of wage change unaffected by occupational, industry and geographic shifts.
An occupational employment survey was initiated to permit selection of a probability sample of occupations and establishments to be studied.
In addition, a small survey was begun to test alternative data collection procedures.
A more efficient area wage survey sample was developed, permitting a reduction in the number of areas studied from 90 to 70 in the coming fiscal year but with improved representation of all 263 SMSA's within the contiguous 48 States.
An analytical review was begun to evaluate the design and effectiveness of the area wage survey program.
BLS and the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) continued their contractual arrangement whereby BLS provides ESA with survey results which it uses in administering the Service Contract Act.
During the 1974 fiscal year.
BLS conducted surveys in about 65 areas under this arrangement.
This year, the Bureau published, initially or for the first time in many years, occupational pay data on appliance repair shops.
These industries, along with department stores, have been added to those for which wage structure surveys are conducted periodically.
Also, under this wage survey program.
BLS delivered to ESA tabulations on race and Spanish surname of workers in occupations covered by the construction study.
In conjunction with its annuaì union wage rate study of the building trades.
BLS for the first time published union wage rates in heavy construction.
Other industries in this program are: printing trades, local transit, local trucking.
A report on the General Accounting Office (GAO) review of the annual national survey of professional.
The Bureau is taking action to improve the survey in line with GAO recommendations by developing a more comprehensive training program.
Improved reports were published on surveys of occupational earnings in governments of municipalities with 500,000 or more population.
A comprehensive analysis of health benefit plans was made in cooperation with the Social Security Administration to provide data needed in connection with National Health insurance legislation.
Much data on pension plans were provided for the executive and legislative branches in consideration of pension legislation.
First reports on employee compensation structures of each of the 50 State governments were published.
A summary report on the compensation structure for empioyees in the private nonfarm sector, the fourth such study since 1966, was published.
In line with its increased emphasis on industrial relations developments in the public sector.
It is now a reliable reference source for practitioners and for in-house research.
A study, "Collective Bargaining Agreements in the Federal Service. Late 1971,." and a report on work stoppages in government in 1972 were issued.
Three studies analyzing various provisions of State.
The biennial edition of the "Directory of National Unions and Empioyee Associations" was expanded with new material on women members and a section describing the extent and operations of union strike funds.
Collective bargaining and strike summaries.
The Bureau's analysis of collective bargaining practices in the private sector continued with the completion of a study of hours and overtime provisions.
Bulletins presenting the characteristics of all major contracts and those for the construction industry were published.
Studies of the treatment of safety and health issues in collective bargaining before and after the passage of'the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 were in progress at year's end.
For the National Commission on Productivity, the Bureau completed a study of the prevalence of labor-management productivity committees.
During the fiscal year.
BLS published a new set of consumer price indexes measuring price change in urban areas grouped by geographic region.
These indexes added a new dimension to analysis of price data by providing alternative measures for comparison with the U.S. city average and by permitting comparisons of price change among different regions of the country.
The basis of pricing for refined petroleum products and industrial chemicals was converted from quotations published in trade journals to transaction prices reported directly to the Bureau by producers.
The two components account for approximately 5 percent of the weight of the Wholesale Price Index.
The indexes for refined petroleum products (gasoline, distillates. and residual fuel oil) were revised back to March 1973 in order to reflect more accurately the price trends over the past year.
These revisions affected the indexes for refined petroleum products, fuels and related products, and power, and the various stages of processing and durability classifications.
Fourteen new 4-digit industry indexes were published, bringing to 152 the number of industríes published in the mining and manufacturing sector of the economy.
Export price indexes covering 17 percent of U.S. commodity exports and import indexes covering approximately 3 percent of the value of U.S. imports were released.
These indexes were converted from annual indexes to quarterly indexes.
Collection on a quarterly basis began in March 1974.
The Autumn 1972 costs of the retired couple's budgets were published early in fiscal year 1974.
Later in the year, estimates of Autumn 1973 costs of the 4-person family budgets were prepared and published.
Substantial progress was made on the revision of the Consumer Price Index during fiscal 1974.
This effort will result in a revised version of the present index for urban wage and clerical workers as well ás a new index for the urban population.
Both indexes are scheduled for release in April 1977.
Revisions of the index have been carried out at approximately 10-year intervals to make necessary adjustments in index weights, to select new samples of areas, market basket items, and retail outlets and to incorporate improvements in index concepts and methodology.
During the year, the Bureau of the Census completed the data collection phase of the Consumer Expenditure Survey that will provide the basis for the selection of the new samples of market basket items and for the item weights used in the index.
It also collected data for the Point of Purchase Survey which will provide information needed in the selection of the sample of retail outlets.
BLS initiated data collection activities for a revised index for the rent component of the CPI and began the field testing of the revised price collection methodology that will be used on other components of the index.
A new sample of 85 areas was selected for the revised index to replace the present 56 area sample.
Work was begun on a new computer system, and preparations were made for the selection of the new samples of market basket items and retail outlets in the coming year.
In fiscal 1974, the Bureau embarked on a significant revision and expansion of the program to analyze and publish data on the employment situation of American workers.
The focus of BLS measures of employment, unemployment, and labor force, which have served as prime indicators of the Nation's economic performance, were sharpened to enhance their responsiveness to the needs of public policy and legislative decisionmaking.
New methods for estimating State and local unemployment were initiated.
These are designed to provide more accurate local data that are comparable from State to State and are consistent with the national unemployment estimates.
Introduction of these new methods was given added urgency by the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973, which based distribution of funds in part on local unemployment figures.
The conceptual framework of the new methods for estimating State and local unemployment was based on three critical priorities: identifying the worker by place of residence: counting individuals rather than jobs: and maximizing place-to-place comparability.
To the maximum extent possible, the data on employment and unemployment are derived from a survey of households: the Current Population Survey.
The Current Population Survey.
In a related development, the Bureau's special analysis of the geographic profile of employment and unemployment was expanded to cover publication of statistics for the 10 Federal administrative regions, 19 large States, and the 30 largest Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas.
Also in response to CETA requirements, research proposals were developed on how to measure "labor market related economic hardship." which is primarily concerned with the adequacy of employment and worker earnings.
In related efforts.
Work continued on the Bureau's regular program aimed at identifying inequities in the economic status of members of racial and ethnic minority groups and women.
In this connection.
An article appearing in the Monthly Labor Review analyzed the initial findings from the survey based on 1973 annual average data.
Current statistics are now published on a quarterly basis.
Another article explored the dynamics of the Negro-white unemployment differential and a chapter on the labor force status of Black Americans was completed for the annual Census Bureau report on that subject.
Several reports were prepared on the subject of women in the workplace.
One dealt with trends in sex stereotyping in the skilled trades.
Research continued into the economic and social implications of changing work patterns in the United States.
In this connection, new information on days and hours of work was obtained from the Bureau's Current Population Survey.
In response to the need for more detailed information on the status of veterans for legislation and program purposes, an article was prepared on recent trends in their employment status and new data on a year's work experience for Vietnam-era veterans were obtained from the Current Population Survey.
Several other reports were published providing a more comprehensive picture of the Nation's employment situation and covering the labor force status of identifiable groups in the population.
Labor force projections were developed profiling expected rapid changes over the next two decades in the educational levels of workers and the implications of those changes on labor force supply and demand.
A report on the employment status of 1972 college graduates examined their success in obtaining employment in their fields of study and the kinds of jobs they found.
BLS continued to strengthen and expand its program of research in productivity and technology.
In order to provide greater coverage on productivity measures in the private economy.
Developmental work was also completed for many service industries such as retail food stores and laundry.
Comparative studies of productivity and costs between U S and other industrial countries were conducted.
Updated measures on manufacturing trends in output per man-hour.
As part of a continuing effort to assess the manpower implications of new technology, a study of technology and manpower in the printing and publishing industry was published.
During the year.
The Bureau.
Projections were produced for 48 States and more than 100 sub-State areas with populations of 250.000 or more.
Two supplements to the bulletin "Tomorrow's Manpower Needs" were published.
Supplement 3 provided a scheme for matching the Bureau's occupational classification to the vocational education curriculum codes used by the Office of Education.
Supplement 4 explained the development and uses of occupational openings estimates arising from deaths and retirements and provided 1970 and 1985 rates for all States and the District of Columbia, as well as the U.S.
The 1974-75 edition of the "Occupational Outiook Handbook".
Looking Ahead to a Career".
Work was completed on preparing a publication that presents, for over 200 occupations.
This publication is designed for use in planning education and training programs.
As the effort to assess the manpower impact of Federal Government programs continued.
In the BLS-MA-State cooperative Occupational Employment Statistics Survey Program.
During the year.
25 States and the District of Columbia collected data from establishments in nonmanufacturing and trade industries.
In fiscal 1975.
28 States and the District of Columbia will participate in the cooperative program.
The number of labor areas for which current payroll employment data are regularly published in the monthly Employment and Earnings report increaséd by two to 224.
The job vacancy portion of the job vacancy-labor turnover statistics program was discontinued in January 1974.
An article.
Job Vacancies in Manufacturing. 1969-73." which appeared in the Monthly Labor Review, discussed the information developed during the 5 years that the program existed and the uses of the data as an economic indicator.
Using the existing facilities of the Current Employment Statistics survey, a special effort was made to measure the impact of the energy crisis on employment during the November 1973-March 1974 period.
The results showed that between 150,000 and 225.000 jobs were lost from the direct effect of energy shortages, while 310,000 jobs were lost in industries which may have suffered indirect effects.
A detailed study, "Effect of the Energy Crisis on Employment." was published in the Monthly Labor Review.
The Office of Occupational Safety and Health Statistics (OSHS) completed its third year of operations.
Fiscal year 1974 saw the Office working to complete its recordkeeping revision, issue 1971 and 1972 survey data, and expand its State grant program as well as to carry out special statistical projects.
The OSHA recordkeeping system forms the basis for the OSHA reporting system and annual survey program.
Experience gained from working with the system indicated that several revisions were needed, and they were developed during the year.
Proposed changes in the OSHA recordkeeping regulations.
Use of new recordkeeping forms will start at that time.
In addition.
A revision of Report 412.
What Every Employer Needs to Know about OSHA Recordkeeping." has been completed, as has the booklet.
Recordkeeping Requirements for Employers With Less than Eight Employees.
During fiscal year 1974, two different annual surveys were analyzed.
Bulletin No. 1789.
Occupational Injuries and Illnesses by Industry. July 1December 31, 1971." was published in December 1973 Survey data were also prepared for the 1972 annual survey.
A press release on May 2, 1974.
The Quality Measurement Survey (QMS) for 1972 was a major activity during the first quarter of fiscal 1974.
Plans were underway at the end of the year for the 1973 QMS.
These surveys are conducted to validate the quality of data collected.
OSHS conducted several special statistical studies this year including a five State study on worker's compensation covering California.
Nebraska, Florida.
Maine and Wisconsin Tabulations and safety specialist reports from each State have also been submitted.
Negotiations with 45 States and territories to provide OSHA with 1972 fatality data based on workers compensation statistics were completed.
New York State data on workers' compensation was also analyzed.
A study was conducted to determine the feasibility of collecting information about safety and health related expenditures from large employers.
An extensive analysis of safety and heaith provisions in collective bargaining agreements was begun.
During the year, preliminary work was begun on projects to study seasonality in State workers' compensation data and the relationships of job experience and employer occupation to accident rates.
During the year, 53 State grants were processed.
The statistical sections of 44 State plans were submitted under Section 18(b) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
These were analyzed and comments on them forwarded to OSHA.
Thirty-four States satisfied BLS reguirements, and the Secretary of Labor approved 25 plans.
Forty-seven QMS grants were processed.
All except five States.
The bulk of fiscal year 1974 grant funds was required to conduct the annual survey; however, nearly 12 percent of this grant money was used for analysis of workers' compensation data.
The Bureau completed and published the initial phase of its projections of industry and occupational employment requirements of the economy to 1980 and 1985.
An effort is currently underway to expand these projections by analyzing alternative future energy supply-demand outlooks.
Work on several Federal manpower impact projects has been completed.
Studies of the employment reguirements generated by Veterans Administration medical programs, institutional manpower training grants, National Institutes of Health grant programs, and National Aeronautics and Space Administration outlays were completed and at year's end were being edited for publication.
The "Manpower Requirements Factbook," designed to assist agencies in estimating their own manpower requirements, was completed.
The BLS cosponsored with the Massachusetts Executive Office of Manpower Affairs the 32nd North American Conference on Labor Statistics.
The theme was "New Directions in Labor Statistics to Meet Changing Needs."
Nearly 300 delegates represented 42 States, the District of Columbia.
Also attending as observers was a foreign team representing countries of the Caribbean, Central and South America, Africa, the sub-continent of Asia, and the Far East.
The Office of the Solicitor extended its operations into new areas during the 1974 fiscal year.
The Šolicitor is the legal advisor to the Secretary and all other Departmental officials He is responsible for all legal aspects of Department's functions.
He provides legal services related to both legislation and litigation through an immediate staff in Washington.
D. C.
The Solicitor provides a variety of services in connection with the Department's legislative programs.
These include the coordination of and assistance in the preparation of legislative proposals reports and testimony on proposed legislation.
He also advises.
The Solicitor is the appellate officer for the Department under the Freedom of Information Act.
He issues final administrative decisions on all appeals from disclosure officers denials of requests for access to records.
Litigation services are provided in many types of cases including, but not limited to.
Public Contracts Act.
Title Ill of the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
The Military Selective Service Act protecting reemployment rights of veterans.
The Solicitor represents the Secretary in administrative proceedings.
The Solicitor's staff in Washington.
D. C.
The Solicitor has additional staff in each of the eleven regional offices and six subregional offices of the Department of Labor A paralegal program.
The program includes formal study and on-the-job training.
At present.
The Division of Legislation and Legal Counsel performed numerous legal and drafting services regarding the Administration's legislative proposals The Division was responsible for assisting in preparing reports to the Congress and the Office of Management and Budget on a wide variety of legislation affecting labor.
It also functioned as legal counsel to the Solicitor and to the Assistant Secretary for Policy.
Evaluation, and Research.
Major legislative proposals on which legal services were provided included pension reform legislation.
The Division provided legal support in connection with Departmental studies of the right to privacy.
Civil rights legal services centered primarily around the Federal contract compliance program under Executive Order No. 11246.
A consent decree negotiated by this Division for the Department of Labor in cooperation with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the Department of Justice committed nine major steel companies and the United Steelworkers of America to extensive revision of existing seniority systems.
Assistance was provided in the preparation of the new Revised Order No. 14.
41 CFR Part 60-60.
Applicable to all compliance agencies.
The Division continued to assist the Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC) in its monitoring and enforcement of hometown and imposed construction industry EEO plans.
The Division assisted in preparing Revised OFCC Sex Discrimination Guidelines which were published in the Federal Register for comment and developing uniform testing requirements under Executive Order No. 11246 and Title VIl of the Civil Rights Act.
In cooperation with U.S. Attorneys in various parts of the country.
This Division, which is responsible for the Department's own labor law matters, represented the Department in arbitration, grievances, adverse actions, settiement negotiations, and litigation with Labor Department employees throughout the country.
In particular, legal counsel was provided the management team during negotiation of the collective bargaining agreement with Local 12.
During fiscal 1974, the Division of Occupational Safety and Health assisted the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Office of Standards Development in promulgating several safety and health standards and in publishing numerous proposed standards.
Among them were a permanent standard regulating employee exposure to 14 carcinogenic substances and an emergency temporary standard on exposure to vinyl chloride.
Several standards dealing with hazardous materials and fire protection were promulgated.
In connection with proposed standards, the Division served as legal counsel in public rulemaking hearings on vinyl chloride, roll-over protective structures on agricultural tractors.
Scores of applications for variances from standards were reviewed by the Division.
The Division provided assistance and guidance to the various regional offices of the Solicitor in handling adjudicatory proceedings.
In addition to preparing approximately 220 petitions for review and other pleadings and 311 briefs for submission to the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission, attorneys from the Division themselves appeared in approximately 20 hearings before Administrative Law Judges.
Both written and trial work covered a wide range of topics and standards.
The Division has taken an active role in developing the law of occupational safety and health.
Attorneys in the Division have taken an increasingly active role in determining the direction of litigation under Section 11(c) of the Act, which prohibits discrimination against employees availing themselves of various provisions of the statute.
On these matters, USDL attorneys based in Washington have been in close contact with both USDL regional attorneys and OSHA personnel in the field.
Appellate litigation under the Occupational Safety and Health Act continued to increase dramatically during the year.
At the end of the fiscal year, there were 42 cases pending before the United States Courts of Appeal, compared with 28 last year.
The issues raised by these cases ranged from large constitutional challenges to the Act.
Atlas Roofing Co..
Inc. v. Brennan (C.A. 5. No. 73- 2249), to matters having significant OSHA program implications.
Brennan v. Santa Fe Trail Transport Co. (C.A. 10. No. 74-1049) (whether the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission may hold a safety or health standard facially void for vagueness).
There have also been court challenges brought by employers and representatives of employees concerning occupational safety and health standards promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, e.g. Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturers Association v. Brennan (C.A. 3. No. 74-1129) (permanent carcinogens standard).
In addition, the Secretary has obtained several favorable decisions upholding challenged standards, including, Industrial Union Department.
AFL-CiO v. Hodgson (C.A. D.C., No. 72-1713) (asbestos standard).
The Office of the Solicitor, both at the regional and national levels, completed the initial review of the 49 State plans submitted under section 18 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
Decisions of approval with supporting legal reasons were prepared and published in the Federal Register for Kentucky.
Alaska, the Virgin Islands, Michigan, Vermont, Illinois, Nevada, Connecticut, Hawaii.
Indiana.
Wisconsin and Wyoming, An informal hearing on approval was held for the Wisconsin plan and this Division prepared the legal documents supporting the Assistant Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health's decision to propose rejection of the Virginia State plan.
In conjunction with State plan approvals, this Division reviewed the legal aspects of State applications for funding under section 23(g) of the Act.
Regulations were issued on procedures for submission and review of changes to approved State plans and several revisions to approved plans were published for public comment.
In order to implement OSHA's responsibility to monitor the approved plans.
Another brief was prepared and subsequently filed in AFL-C/O v. Brennan (D.D.C.) in defense of a suit to enjoin approval of all the State plans approved to date.
Perhaps the most significant development under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) in fiscal 1974 was the issuance of the first comprehensive interpretative regulation since 1959 under the election provisions of the Act.
29 CFR Part 452.
There was also considerable significant litigation activity.
Four appellate court decisions considered the role and authority of the Secretary under Title IV of the LMRDA In Hodgson v. Local 400.
Bakery Workers.
In Howard v. Hodgson, the Eighth Circuit again upheld the Secretary's right to refrain from filing suit to set an election aside where the violations disclosed did not lead to a finding of probable cause that they may have affected the outcome.
In Brennan v. Local 551.
The court also confirmed that the Secretary's investigative authority is not limited by the scope of the member's complaint concerning the conduct of the election.
Further.
Conflicting decisions were rendered on validity of meeting attendance rules as qualifications of union members to run for office.
In Brennan v. Loca/ 5724.
Steelworkers (D.C. Ohio).
The court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in Brennan v. Local 639, Teamsters, ruled that a 2-year 50 percent meeting attendance requirement, which had the effect of disqualifying 97 percent of the members as candidates for office.
In Brennan v. District 50.
Allied and Technical Workers.
The Court approved the Secretary's decision that it would be unnecessary to proceed with a scheduled supervised election of officers before holding the referendum.
An important decision construing the LMRDA reporting requirements was Brennan v. Local 562.
UA: The District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri required the union to submit annual financial reports for a voluntary political fund which was collected.
An important decision was issued under the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act.
The Secretary sought to require that the members of an Advisory Committee be bonded.
The court accepted the Secretary's broad definition of "handling" which extends to persons having directory atuhority with respect to fund assets.
The Division of Employee Benefits.
This Division participated in some 175 cases arising under the amended Longshoremen's Act.
In conjunction with the Justice Department, the Division successfully defended the constitutionality of Part C of Title IV of the Federaí Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969, as amended In a far-reaching decision, a 3-judge district court upheld those provisions of the Act and the implementing regulations that impose liability on the coal mining industry for the payment of black lung benefits on and after January 1.
1974 The court specifically affirmed the authority of the Secretary to devise a reasonable formula for assessing liability against a particular coal operator (National Independent Coal Óperator's Assoc.
372 F Supp.
During fiscal 1974.
In a number of States.
Procedures for an informal predetermination hearing, developed on the basis of the United States Supreme Court's decision in California Human Resources Dept. v. Java, 402 U.S. 121 (1971).
All three cases went to the Supreme Court, and two of the cases are currently pending before the Supreme Court.
In Christian v. New York State Department of Labor, the United States Supreme Court declined to rule on a challenge to the constitutionality of 5 U.S.C. 8506(a).
The Division had a significant role in implementation of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA).
This included the preparation and publication of extensive regulations under the various titles of the Act.
The transition of various parts of programs under the Manpower Development and Training Act, and Economic Opportunity Act.
Negotiations were conducted with the Department of Health, Education and Welfare and Office of Management and Budget to facilitate the drafting of interdepartmental regulations under the Work Incentive Program.
The Division also participated in a task force which handled the complex problems involved in the transfer under the "D.C. Home Rule Act." of Department of Labor Manpower activities in the District of Columbia to the District Government.
The Division helped develop procedures and forms for the Department's responsibilities in the loan approval process under the Rural Development Act.
The Manpower Division was reorganized during the year to reflect new programs, a shift of emphasis in existing programs, and a significant increase in defensive litigation.
A separate unit to handle litigation was established.
The greatest number of litigated cases were appeals from final administrative determinations rendered by Department of Labor contracting officers under contract disputes.
District Court litigation involving certifications, or denials of certification, under the Immigration and Nationality Act increased substantially.
For the first time in several years, this litigation reached the Court of Appeals, resulting in a significant victory.
In Pesikoff v. Secretary of Labor.
C.A. D.C.) the court, in a 2-1 decision, recognized that an alien or his employer seeking certification had the burden of establishing that it is not possible for the employer to find a qualified American worker.
Five major cases, including one class action.
A favorable decision was rendered in the class action case.
The remaining four cases were pending in the courts at the end of the year.
An extensive review of the Wagner-Peyser system for rendering services to migrant and seasonal farmworkers was undertaken in the course of negotiating a resolution of the remaining differences between the parties in NAACP v. Brennan (C.A. No. 2010- 72, D.D.C.).
Coordinated legal assistance was provided to concerned regional and state office personnel at special training conferences.
The Division of General Legal Services provides comprehensive legal services for the Department in a wide variety of matters, with specific program responsibility under such diverse legislation as the Freedom of Information Act, the Service Contract Act.
Davis-Bacon Act, veterans' reemployment rights under the Military Selective Service Act, garnishment restrictions under the Consumer Credit Protection Act, the Federal restrictions on child labor under the Fair Labor Standards Act and the Walsh-Healey Act, as well as responsibility for the legal services required in the Department on matters relating to international activity.
This Division assists the Solicitor in the exercise of his function as the Labor Department member of the Administrative Conference of the United States.
This Division has departmental responsibility for Federal Register publication, reviewing all documents to be submitted to the Register for legal sufficiency, format and accuracy.
There was a substantial increase during the year in activity under the Freedom of Information Act.
Twenty-six appeals were filed with the Solicitor.
In the majority of the cases, the appeal from the disclosure officer's denial of access to records was granted in whole or in part.
To date, in cases where the disclosure officer's denial was affirmed, none of the decisions have been appealed to the courts.
The Division also prepared analyses of court decisions under the Act for use in Regional Solicitor's offices and compiled informational material for the Secretary for distribution within the Department to the disclosure officers who have initial responsibility for answering requests.
Under Title Ill of the Consumer Credit Protection Act, the Department received one favorable district court decision on remand from the appellate court and two adverse appellate decisions.
At the close .
Litigation activity on veterans' reemployment rights reached its highest level since the late 1940's.
During this fiscal year, activity was concerned with two major areas, vacation eligibility and pension rights.
Because there remain conflicting decisions in the courts of appeal which it is believed should be resolved by the Supreme Court, a petition for a writ of certiorari was filed in Foster v. Dravo Corp., 490 F.2d 55 (C.A. 3, 1973).
A major increase in pension rights cases is anticipated as veterans of World War Il and the Korean conflict become concerned with retirement benefits.
During this fiscal year.
In other areas.
Inc., 490 F 2d 586 (C.A 2. 1973).
374 F. Supp.
979 (E.D. Pa., 1974).
In addition to providing legal services necessary for the administration of the Service Contract Act.
One of the year's most significant decisions concerning the Act was Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. McLucas, 364 F. Supp.
The court ruled that the Secretary of Labor has exclusive authority to determine coverage under the Service Contract Act and that his determination is not subject to judicial review.
I ate in the vear, the child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act were amended to provide civil penalties for violations, to impose responsibility on employers for obtaining proof of age of young workers they employ.
Just 2 months after enactment, the constitutionality of this amendment was challenged in a suit brought against the Secretary in Oregon (Kelly v. Brennan, Civil Action 74-450 (D.C. Ore.)).
Following the transfer of administration of the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act to the Employment Standards Administration, this Division coordinated legal services for a crackdown on illegal operations of a number of migrant labor contractors.
A number of contractors have been enjoined from operating in violation of the Act.
The Division has also assisted in the preparation of Department testimony before Congressional committees in support of amendments to the Act which would provide more effective coverage.
This Division continued to perform a variety of legal services required in the administration and enforcement of the Davis-Bacon Act and related statutes.
Legal assistance was provided officials in the Department and in other agencies in connection with labor standards regulations pertaining to apprentices and trainees on Federal and Federally-assisted construction and in resolving problems regarding the applicability of prevailing wage standards to housing programs.
The Division's attorneys appeared for the Acting Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division in a number of appellate proceedings before the Wage Appeals Board.
In Associate Builders and Contractors.
Inc. v. Peter J. Brennan, Secretary of Labor (D.D. C., Civil Action No. 1321–73, 1974), the court granted the Department's motion to dismiss the complaint, ruling that the correctness of the Secretary's determination is not open to attack on judicial review.
In the area of international labor affairs and tariffs and foreign trade, the Division participated in and undertook the preparation of draft Executive Branch position letters.
The Division also participated in and undertook preparation of additional material in connection with certain ILo law and practice reports required to be submitted to the IL0 by member countries.
The Deputy Associate Solicitor.
General Legal Services.
Switzerland.
The Department's reports on proposals for legislation in the tarriffs and trade area were prepared or reviewed by the Division, which also assisted in the preparation and review of materials relating to the Trade Reform Act.
Legal advice was given regarding the voluntary textile trade program, including the recent multilateral Arrangement Regarding International Trade in Textiles.
The Fair Labor Standards Division performs legal services in connection with the Department's administration and enforcement of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the Equal Pay Act (EPA).
In fiscal 1974.
274 more than last year.
Included were 177 Equal Pay Act cases.
The Department received 32 decisions from the Supreme Court and courts of appeals: 26 were favorable.
In addition.
11 petitions for certiorar opposed by the Department were denied by the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court handed down its first decision under the Equal Pay Act in Brennan v. Corning Glass, 42 USLW 4827 (June 3. 1974).
This decision, which resulted in a complete victory for the Secretary, dealt with the Act's definition of "equal work."
The Court held that Corning could not pay a higher base wage to night shift inspectors performing the same work as day shift inspectors where the night shift inspectors had originally all been men and where the higher base wage was paid in addition to the prescribed plantwide night shift differential.
The Court also held that Corning did not cure the violation when, without raising the lower base wage paid to its day shift inspectors, it integrated the day and night shift jobs.
This was so even though more than half of the night shift inspectors at the time of trial were wornen receiving the higher male rate, the Court ruled.
As a result of this decision, Corning paid over $1 million to employees at its Corning, N.Y., Wellsboro, Pa. and Central Falls, R.I. establishments.
In another EPA case, Brennan v. J. M. Fields, Inc., 488 F.2d 443, the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit upheld the Secretary's contention that jobs performed by softline department managers (who traditionally have been women) can be compared for purposes of the Equal Pay Act with jobs performed by hardline department managers (who traditionally have been men).
Many of the equal pay suits filed this year involved professional women, including teachers.
In the one decided case, Brennan y.
Woodbridge Schoo/ District (D. Del.).
The other major development under the Equal Pay Act was a second consent decree entered into between AT&T and its 24 operating companies and the Department of Labor, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and Department of Justice.
This decree corrected equal pay violations affecting women management employees, and provided for an estimated $7 million in back pay and $23 million in first year salary increases.
Under the terms of the decree, AT&T and the other telephone companies agreed to discontinue their prior practice of basing salaries on the employee's former salary (which generally led to lower wages for women performing equal work), and to establish uniform minimum starting rates for all jobs in the first two levels of management, based on the average pay of the higher-paid sex.
The most significant development under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act was the settlement of the Secretary's suit against Western Operations, Inc., a Division of Standard Oil of California.
Under the terms of this settlement, the company agreed to reinstate 120 employees who had been discharged allegedly because of age, and to pay approximately $2 million in back wages to 160 former employees.
In another major ADEA case against the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company and the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway Company, the Secretary is seeking more than $20 million for some 300 present and former railroad employees.
This same suit seeks the reinstatement of employees who were unfairly discharged or demoted, and, in addition, the abolition of a provision in the company's amended pension plan for mandatory retirement at the age of 62.
In addition to these litigation activities, the Department negotiated several affirmative action programs with employers whose business practices had been investigated for ADEA violations.
These programs include reinstatements, promises to hire older workers, and recovery of damages in the form of lost wages.
There were a number of important decisions under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
In Falk v. Brennan.
414 U.S. 190, the Supreme Court held that the annual sales volume of a building management company, for purposes of determining coverage, is measured by commission payments when the building is owned by a third party.
The Court also held that the building owner and building management company are joint employers and that both are liable for unpaid wages.
Two courts of appeals agreed with the Secretary that the requisite connection with commerce can be established by the handling of goods which, although originally produced in another State, were bought from a local supplier and were wholly consumed in the operation of the employer's business.
Brennan v. Dillion, 483 F.2d 1334 (C.A. 10) and State of lowa v. Brennan, 494 F.2d 100 (C.A. 8).
The State of lowa decision also held that the doctrine of sovereign immunity does not bar the Secretary from bringing FLSA suits against State employers.
The courts ruled on several exemption issues, holding that an airport parking lot is not an exempt retail establishment (Brennan v. Air Terminal Parking of Columbia, Inc., (C.A. 4)).
Two other important decisions were Brennan v. Heard, 491 F.2d 1 (C.A. 5) and Brennan v. Veterans Cleaning.
482 F.2d 1362 (C.A. 5), which held that the FLSA entitles employees to "cash in hand."
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASA) directs and coordinates the administrative functions of the Department to insure the most effective use of Departmental resources including money, people, and facilities.
To improve the quality and effectiveness of OASA staff support service to other Department of Labor agencies a reorganization was effected in April 1974.
This involved realigning the office into six major directorates responsible for data automation, financial management, audits and investigations, administrative programs and services, management and operations review, and personnel management.
The reorganization has proved effective as demonstrated by the increase in advance consultation by other agencies with OASA in connection with organization design and functional realignment and the development of management systems.
It has also improved OASA staff support to the Program and Budget Review Committee and to the management by objectives program and has resulted in better management of data automation resources.
During the year, full-scale operation of remote job entry terminals located in the ten regional offices was initiated.
An ADP manager was assigned in each of the regions and training seminars were conducted to provide these new managers with guidelines and a basis for effective communication between national office and regional operating staffs.
Payroll services were further automated with direct data input and error correction performed at the regional offices through the implementation of a regional terminal network system.
This direct service has resulted in time savings, increased accuracy.
Financial management advisors were assigned in all regional offices to strengthen the overall financial management capacity in the regions.
To permit better management control.
The audit staff issued 1.394 audit reports.
It is expected that the potential savings to the Government will be $6.3 million.
In addition, 117 indirect cost rates were negotiated.
In cooperation with the President's energy reduction program.
A housing plan and move schedule for occupancy of the new Department of Labor building at Third Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W. was prepared and approved.
When the move is completed in 1975 the Department of Labor national offices will be housed in three closely located buildings instead of 18 separate locations.
In March of 1974.
Participation in the program should result in increased production of cataloging and in more timely availability of new materials.
The Department's fiscal 1974-1975 affirmative action program plan for the employment of the handicapped was approved by the Civil Service Commission.
The plan requires that agencies provide adequate hiring, placement.
An evaluation system was developed to monitor progress of the plan.
The education and career development program initiated a series of executive development seminars for GS-12 through GS-15 employees.
The University in Residence program for executives and executive candidates granted its first MBA degree.
A principal goal of OASA in fiscal 1974 was to decentralize more of its management functions and capabilities to the regions.
Reflecting this move was the change in name of Regional Administrative Offices (RAO's) to Regional Administration and Management Offices (RAMO's).
Major accomplishments in the field during the year included the establishment of regional financial advisors.
Progress was made in Department-wide safety.
The overall employee accident, injury.
The Department's affirmative action plan, establishing activities in the areas of recruitment, upward mobility, training, and community relationships, was approved by the Civil Service Commission for the third consecutive year.
A comprehensive Spanish-speaking program was organized and became fully operational in the Department.
The appointment of a full-time Spanish speaking coordinator was approved.
An EEO review and evaluation system was developed and implemented.
A Federal women's program was implemented in the national and regional offices to improve the recruitment, training, and upward mobility efforts for women in the Department.
For the first time.
EEO Incentive Awards were given to eight DOL employees for their outstanding efforts in contributing to the effectiveness of the Department's EEO program.
A wide range of significant activities in the international labor field was continued during fiscal year 1974.
The Department participated in an extensive series of meetings under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) which resulted in an agreement for a multilateral multifiber textile arrangement.
The new arrangement will permit orderly development and growth of world textile trade without disruption of domestic markets.
It will help safeguard the jobs of 2.3 million American workers in the textile and apparel industries.
Under this new arrangement all existing bilateral textile agreements must conform to certain new reguirements.
Nine of the existing 40 agreements were successfully renegotiated toward this end.
Approximately 9.400 workers claiming to be adversely affected by competitive imports were helped in preparing petitions for trade adjustment assistance.
More than 4,400 workers were ultimately certified eligible for such assistance by the Bureau of International Labor Affairs.
In the foreign economic policy area, the Department, as a statutory member of the Council on International Economic Policy.
This included preparations for a new round of multilateral trade negotiations (MTN).
The Department also participated in several international meetings under GATT auspices on the MTN and in meetings of various commitees of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) on trade and related matters.
Utilizing its new research and analysis capability in the foreign economic policy area, the Department inaugurated industry studies of the effect of international trade and investment on income and employment, and of worker adjustment to the impact of trade under the trade adjustment assistance program.
Through the Department of Labor International Technical Assistance Corps (DOLITAC).
47 technical aid projects were initiated in 26 countries in the Far East, Central and Latin America, the Caribbean, and Near East and South Asia.
Training and cultural exchange programs in the labor and manpower fields were arranged for 1,260 foreign visitors to the United States under the sponsorship of the Agency for International Development, the State Department, the United Nations, and other organizations.
Visitors included the Ministers of Labor of Bolivia, Ireland, Malta, Trinidad and Tobago, Japan, Honduras, and Nicaragua, and the Japanese Minister of Science and Technology.
During the year, the Department participated actively in the management of the U.S. Foreign Service, with the Deputy Under Secretary for International Affairs serving on the Board of the Foreign Šervice.
The Department co-sponsored with the State Department conferences of Labor Attaches and Economic Officers in Éurope at Tunis and in Asia at New Delhi.
In the International Labor Organization (ILO), the Department provided leadership for U.S. participation.
The Overseas Veterans Counseling Program.
During the year, they briefed approximately 67, 700 -members of the Armed Forces in groups and nearly 22,000 individually.
During fiscal 1974, the over-all workload and productivity of the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board (ECAB) exceeded that of every fiscal year since 1969.
The number of cases in posture for Board decision at the end of fiscal 1974 was zero, the best in the Board's history.
ECAB continued its decision-making activities by closing 177 cases during the year.
The Board has the authority to make final decisions on appeals from decisions of the Office of Workers Compensation Programs on cases arising under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act involving work-connected injuries and diseases.
The Board began the fiscal year with 41 cases pending.
During the year, 179 new appeals were docketed and 177 cases were closed, leaving 43 pending cases at the end of the year.
Of these 43 cases, none were ready for Board decision.
They were awaiting preliminary proceedings or pleadings, such as the filing of a memorandum by the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs to justify its determination or for a reply by appellant pursuant to the Board's rules of procedure.
The average time for deciding an appeal was 3.7 months in fiscal 1974, compared with 3.5 months in fiscal 1973.
New procedures adopted toward the latter part of fiscal 1974 are expected to result in a shorter time lapse in handling cases in fiscal 1975.
Improvement was already shown at the end of the year when cases settled in June had a handling time lapse of only 2.7 months.
The Board hears and determines appeals from decisions of administrative law judges regarding claims for compensation under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and its extensions, and under Title IV, Section 415 and Part C of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act which provides benefits for total disability or death due to pneumoconiosis.
The Board in effect replaces the 175 Federal District Courts where appeals were processed prior to the 1972 amendments to the acts.
The three members of the permanent Board were appointed by the Secretary of Labor on April 8, 1974.
Ar interim Board was appointed by the Secretary of Labor on January 8.
During the period July 1, 1973 to June 30, 1974, 71 cases were appealed to the Board and decisions were issued in 47 cases.
It is expected that the number of cases appealed under the Longshore Act and its extensions will more than triple during the next fiscal year.
New legislation and national developments affecting American workers helped shape a wide spectrum of the Department's information activities during the year.
Among the laws passed during the year that required special informational output were the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act, the Rehabilitation Act, Fair Labor Standards Act amendments and the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.
Major news releases and several news conferences followed the signing of landmark equal employment opportunity agreements by the Department and other federal agencies with some of the nation's largest employers.
Information about the agreements.
Standard Oil of California and nine steel industry firms, was designed to promote awareness of and compliance with federal equal employment opportunity requirements.
Rising cost of living and public concern about energy shortages heightened interest in the Consumer Price Index, unemployment figures, retail gasoline prices and other pertinent data released monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Development of new job safety and health standards relating to such hazards as vinyl chloride exposure were brought to the public's attention through information materials.
Four of five volumes of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's subscription service, containing updated standards, regulations and procedures, were made available to the public.
In addition, a 26-minute film, "This is OSHA," was produced to promote voluntary compliance with safety and health regulations.
Other information materials reflected Departmental emphasis on increasing apprenticeship opportunities, encouraging the hiring of Vietnam-era veterans and promoting more and better job opportunities for minority group members and women.
In-depth coverage of Departmental activities continued in such agency periodicals as Job Safety and Health.
To facilitate the exchange of ideas and information among prime sponsors and other grantees under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act, the periodical Interchange was initiated.
The Employment Standards Digest was conceived and issued monthly to keep labor organizations.
The Department took the lead in a government-wide effort to improve federal graphics by beginning development of a consistent "visual identity" for all of its graphic materials.
Purpose of the effort, coordinated by the National Endowment for the Arts.
In the continuing effort to inform special constituencies, news packets highlighting Department programs were mailed to media serving union members.
Hispanic Americans, women, and small-town residents.
News releases, articles.
Department officials maintained an active schedule of speaking enegagements before labor, business, academic, professional and other groups to inform them about policies and programs.
Regional and agency information offices responded to inquiries and publication requests and performed other appropriate tasks.
Throughout the vear, the principal concern of those engaged in the Department's information efforts was the public's right and need to know.
The principal goal was to keep the American public informed.