Finding productive employment for people needing jobs continued to be the Labor Department's top priority during the 1978 fiscal year.
The Department was in the forefront of the administration's efforts to train and place the unemployed in useful jobs in both the public and private sectors of the economy.
During the year, President Carter sent to Congress two bills, subsequently enacted into law, designed to reduce unemployment now and to influence significantly America's economic development during the 1980's and beyond: the reauthorization of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) and the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act.
CETA reauthorization and Humphrey-Hawkins carried out this administration's commitment to meet a major challenge of our times—to achieve economic stability and full employment at the same time.
The President added to these two laws a strong anti-inflation policy to get business and labor voluntarily to hold down wage and price increases.
Throughout the 1978 fiscal year, the programs and policies of the Labor Department aimed at meeting the needs and priorities emerging from these underlying economic policies.
At the same time, as the federal government entered a period of limited funds for all programs, the Labor Department's programs and services reflected these realities.
However, programs for the poor, the disadvantaged and the unemployed have not suffered.
In fact, spending on programs that directly aid the disadvantaged has increased.
Even in the post-Proposition 13 era—a time of high concern over taxes, government spending and the cost of living—there was still strong public support for active government programs and services directed toward helping people in need.
The largest share of the Department's program budget went to help meet these needs through jobs, training and other assistance to the unemployed and the disadvantaged.
The new CETA—the government's principal employment and training program—targeted tax dollars on those most in need.
It emphasized training and placement in private-sector jobs, created public service jobs for those unable to find jobs in the labor market, simplified administrative and paperwork requirements for prime sponsors, and strengthened safeguards against fraud and other abuses.
More than 3.3 million people obtained public and private employment or training services through CETA programs during the fiscal year.
Another 1.1 million disadvantaged vouths participated in a nine-week summer jobs program.
The proportion of participants from economically disadvantaged backgrounds rose significantly above the previous year's.
More blacks, women and former welfare recipients also participated in the public service jobs program.
CETA jobs and training programs emphasized meaningful work and learning useful skills.
They helped people who lost their jobs, who lacked the skills and training to enter the job market, or who had been discriminated against in their job search.
The CETA programs, including summer and youth job initiatives, were among the most important ingredients in President Carter's full employment program.
The goals set by the Humphrey-Hawkins Act—full employment without significant inflationary increases by 1983—are attainable.
By blending private and public job training programs with a sound monetary and fiscal policy, this nation can achieve full employment, reduce inflation, and bring the benefits of our democratic society to all our citizens.
Putting people to work is both a sound fiscal policy and a humane social policy because unemployment is inflationary.
To have people consuming—through unemployment insurance, welfare, or other forms of income maintenance—and not producing, increases inflationary pressure on the economy.
Reducing the rate of youth unemployment was crucial to the overall effort to bring down the unemployment and inflation rates.
Department.
Another 45,000 were enrolled in the Job Corps, almost twice as many as the previous year.
The skills and training these young people received in these programs helped them find and hold productive jobs.
The employment situation for blacks also markedly improved during the fiscal year.
Black adult employment grew at a rate of 5.8 percent through September, 1978, up from an annual rate of 4.7 percent from 1975 to 1977.
The black unemployment rate of 9.5 percent, achieved last September, was the lowest rate since November, 1974.
Black teenage employment has improved greatly since President Carter took office.
The labor force participation of black teenagers has continued to rise since July, 1977 and, at its present level of over 42 percent, has reached its highest level since early 1973.
From its low point in March, 1977, black teenage employment has increased at an average annual rate of over 15 percent to reach a record high of 609,000 employed in March 1979.
Yet the unemployment rates for black adults and teenagers remain above the national average.
Much improvement is needed.
Better targeting of job training and placement programs toward those most in need will help blacks and other minorities improve their employment opportunities.
Job training and other Labor Department programs involved hundreds-of-thousands of people and billions of dollars.
In any program that large, there is always misuse of public funds.
While fraud and other abuses were found in a very small percentage of all the programs, the Department moved vigorously throughout the year to root out wrongdoing.
To aid this effort the Department created an Office of Special Investigations, later the Office of the Inspector General.
Most investigations came after specific complaints, and the Department planned to continue to respond to these promptly.
But prevention is the key to ending misuse of government funds.
To help correct any weak points in our delivery system, we created the Fraud and Abuse Prevention Survey.
While the Department concentrated much of its effort during the year on putting people back to work, it improved performance of its many other duties in helping improve the quality of worklife for all Americans.
In the field of occupational safety and health, a greater emphasis than ever before was placed on occupational health.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) proposed a "generic" cancer policy establishing new procedures and a regulatory framework for protecting workers against the hazards of workplace exposure to a number or carcinogens.
Effective, yet reasonable standards were also issued covering a whole series of toxic substances including benzene, di-bromo-chloropropane, inorganic arsenic, cotton dust and acrylonitrile.
The increased emphasis on worker health did not diminish OSHA's attention to safety hazards.
Ninety-five percent of OSHA's safety inspections were devoted to the most serious risk areas such as construction manufacturing, transportation and petrochemicals.
Even though small and retail businesses tended to be somewhat safer places to work than larger industrial concerns, employee complaints in every size business were vigorously investigated because all working people deserve the fullest protection available under the law.
Because enforcing unnecessary and overly complex regulations and requiring voluminous amounts of paperwork from the public often wastes taxpayer dollars and hinders proper implementation of the law, OSHA deleted 928 safety standards unneeded or unrelated to job safety and health.
Eliminating nuisance standards and simplifying existing regulations enabled OSHA to concentrate on more serious and significant hazards.
We recognized our responsibility to be reasonable and prudent in our search for the most effective way to protect workers from health and safety hazards.
OSHA also helped small businesses learn more about its programs and expanded its educational programs for workers and employers.
Continuing a commonsense approach of directing limited resources against the most serious problems helped OSHA fulfill its obligation to assure a safe and healthy working environment for America's workers.
On November 9, 1977, President Carter signed into law the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 which transferred the Mining Enforcement and Safety Administration from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Labor and renamed it the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA).
The new law placed increased emphasis on health in mining, and new inspectors were recruited and trained to carry out the additional inspections required under the law.
During the fiscal year, MSHA carried out more than 65,000 inspections and investigations at the 6,500 coal mines under its jurisdiction.
It conducted an additional 21,300 inspections and investigations were conducted at 12,000 metal and nonmetal mines.
The Department also created two committees to determine which advisory standards in metal and nonmetal mines should be mandatory under the new law and to formulate regulations for a new program designed to train new miners and annually retrain all miners.
Pension protection was another area where the Labor Department worked to improve its services to the public by reducing unnecessary paperwork.
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) safeguards the pensions and benefits of almost 40 million participants and beneficiaries, covering almost a half-million plans with $280 billion in assets in fiscal 1978.
The effective administration of ERISA will determine whether millions of workers will have income security in their retirement years.
Throughout the year, the Labor Department emphasized implementation of ERISA's reporting and disclosure provisions to furnish necessary information to participants, beneficiaries and government agencies without creating unreasonable requirements.
The Department proposed changes in actuarial reports and annual reports to cut costs and time involved in administering the pension plans covered by ERISA.
An audio-visual presentation was designed and made available to plan sponsors with fewer than 100 participants to assist them in filing their annual report forms.
In February, the President announced a reorganization plan aimed at streamlining the federal government's equal employment opportunity programs.
Implemented in October, this consolidation effort placed all equal employment contract compliance functions in the Department's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP).
Eleven different federal agencies formerly carried out these activities on a daily basis.
This enforcement consolidation should help improve the employment opportunities for millions of workers, particularly minorities, women, handicapped persons, Vietnam-era veterans and disabled veterans of all wars.
The Department's enforcement strategy targets resources to those industries where the greatest opportunities and upward mobility existed for these groups of workers.
Employers also benefited by having consistent policy and one-stop administration and enforcement of all EEO laws.
Employers were better able to understand EEO policies, and they were encouraged to work with the Department in achieving equal employment opportunity for all.
The Department was active in the field of international labor affairs throughout the fiscal year.
Although the United States withdrew from the International Labor Organization in November, it increased its participation in other international organizations, such as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
In June, the Department hosted an OECD conference on collective bargaining and worked throughout the year to strengthen the concept of tripartite participation among government, business and labor organizations to deal with the many complicated problems of international economics and labor affairs.
Through these, and other programs, the Labor Department's wide-ranging activities touched even more closely the lives of Americans.
United States.
Working to serve an even larger and more diverse work-force, the Labor Department in fiscal 1978 emphasized further improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its programs in order to continue helping people improve their lives.
To move ahead with economic stimulus activities started during the previous year, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) expanded its ongoing efforts and put new programs into full operation.
The buildup of public service employment (PSE), authorized by the Economic Stimulus Appropriations Act of 1977, was completed by March, when more than 725,000 workers were in PSE jobs.
The four youth programs created by the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act of 1977 started full operations during the year.
The new programs, serving more than 412,800 youth at year's end, are the Young Adult Conservation Corps, Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects, Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projects, and the Youth Employment and Training Program.
The new projects have brought about substantial improvements in worksite supervision, linkages with education, and involvement of community-based organizations.
The Job Corps continued efforts to double the number of youth it serves by opening six new centers and increasing the capacity of existing centers.
During the summer, the national program for older workers expanded its services to provide 47,500 part-time jobs in community work for disadvantaged persons aged 55 and older—an increase of 10,100 over the number supported during the first 9 months of fiscal 1978.
In addition, the Native American Economic Stimulus Program provided training in 15 high-demand skills directly related to reservation economies.
As the economy expanded and employers hired more workers, the President called for a Private Sector Initiative Program to involve business in Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) programs.
ETA began planning for the new program, operated by prime sponsors with the aid of Private Industry Councils representing local business, labor, education, and community interests.
Thirty-four areas received planning grants to demonstrate that the councils can effectively link prime sponsors and the business community.
The Private Sector Initiative will draw on the experiences of the Skill Training Improvement Program (STIP) and the Help Through Industry Retraining and Employment (HIRE) Program.
STIP is designed to achieve a better match between CETA training and industry needs by involving private employers in planning and providing skill training.
HIRE arranged for more than 87,000 veterans and other unemployed workers to start on-the-job training in private industry during the year.
Operated since mid-1977 as a national program, it was expanded in early summer through arrangements for prime sponsors to participate.
Besides opening up jobs for veterans, HIRE increases private sector participation in employment and training.
The Minnesota Work Equity Project, started late in the fiscal year, is testing the feasibility and effectiveness of creating jobs or training opportunities for all employable persons on welfare who cannot find private sector jobs.
ETA contributed recommendations for the revision and extension of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act.
Congress reauthorized CETA shortly after the close of the fiscal year.
In addition to carrying out new activities and expanding PSE, CETA programs continued to provide classroom and on-the-job training, work experience, supportive services, and placement.
Efforts to expand and improve apprenticeship also continued.
During the year, ETA brought new apprenticeship opportunities to service personnel, women, and minorities and developed programs in additional industries and trades.
The Nation's improved economic climate in 1978 was reflected in the substantial gains made by the public employment service in both placements and job orders.
The number of persons placed in nonfarm jobs rose 10 percent, from 4.0 million in fiscal 1977 to 4.4 million in fiscal 1978; and the number of nonfarm jobs listed by employers was up about 15 percent, from 7.9 to 9.1 million.
Particularly encouraging was the 17-percent increase in placements of disabled veterans, achieved largely through activities of the Disabled Veterans Outreach Program.
In addition, 292,000 persons registered in the Work Incentive Program entered employment, about nine-tenths of them in full-time jobs; about half of the new jobholders earned enough to leave welfare.
Another indication of improved employment conditions was a significant decline in unemployment insurance activity.
The number of persons receiving benefits decreased from 9.5 million in fiscal 1977 to 7.9 million in fiscal 1978, and the amount paid out in regular benefits was down from $9.5 billion to $8.6 billion.
A particularly sharp decline—from $4.5 billion to $1.5 billion—took place in payments of extended benefits, Federal Supplemental Benefits, and Special Unemployment Assistance, as these programs ended in most or all States.
ETA began planning for broad involvement of private industry in CETA employment and training.
The Private Sector Initiative Program, requested by the President; will be operated by CETA prime sponsors, which will appoint Private Industry Councils representing local business, labor, education, and community interests to help them make decisions about programing.
Thirty-four areas throughout the country received planning grants to develop ways to effectively link prime sponsors and the business community.
Since private contractors working on publicly supported projects in community development and related areas are an important source of jobs, ETA also formed an Interagency Work Group in Economic Development/Private Sector Jobs to work out cooperative arrangements with agencies supporting such projects.
The Private Sector Initiative will draw on the experiences of the Skill Training Improvement Program (STIP) and the Help Through Industry Retraining and Employment (HIRE) Program.
STIP, supported by $325 million in economic stimulus and fiscal 1978 appropriations, is conducted by CETA prime sponsors in cooperation with the business community.
It is designed to achieve a better match between CETA training and industry needs by involving private employers in helping prime sponsors identify training needs, arrange for and review training, and place program graduates.
Training is limited to occupations requiring significant and recognized skill levels, such as technical, repair, and paraprofessional jobs.
Intended primarily for permanently displaced workers in need of retraining, the program is generally restricted to low-income, long-term unemployed workers and persons exhausting unemployment insurance benefits.
HIRE arranges for private firms to hire and train unemployed veterans and others eligible for veterans' preference and reimburses the employers for their extra training costs.
Operated since mid-1977 as a national program, it was expanded in 1978 by making $90 million available for prime sponsors to participate.
They are expected to provide some 45,000 opportunities by March 31, 1979, when the program's obligatory authority ends.
In addition to opening up jobs for unemployed veterans, HIRE increases private sector participation in employment and training.
ETA also coordinated the buildup of public service employment (PSE) under the Economic Stimulus Appropriations Act of 1977.
The $6.6 billion provided under the act, plus nearly $1.4 billion added under a continuing resolution and a $400 million regular appropriation, were made available for an 18-month period through the end of fiscal 1978.
The goal of 725,000 workers in PSE jobs was exceeded by the beginning of March; thereafter, attention was shifted to maintaining this level and encouraging prime sponsors to work with State employment security agencies to help PSE participants obtain unsubsidized jobs.
In fiscal 1978, 450 prime sponsors conducted programs under CETA Titles I, II, III, and VI.
They included 180 counties, 70 cities, 50 balance-of-State sponsors, 146 consortia, and 4 rural Concentrated Employment Program sponsors.
These sponsors received $1.88 billion for comprehensive services authorized under Title I, such as work experience, classroom and on-the-job training, recruitment, orientation counseling and other supportive services, and placement.
CETA programs operating under Titles I, II, and VI served 2,558,600 persons during the year—1,331,500 in Title I programs, 210,200 in Title II, and 1,016,900 for Title VI.
Before contributing recommendations for revising and extending CETA, ETA consulted program operators on needed program improvements.
Two groups participating in consultations were the Directors'Work Group and the Community-Based Organizations Work Group, which meet regularly to exchange ideas on operational issues, identify operational problems, and suggest actions to program administrators.
During the year, the President asked ETA and other Federal agencies to stress services for former drug abusers.
ETA identified CETA programs that have cooperative arrangements with State or local drug treatment centers and started preparing a videotape to give needed information to the staffs of prime sponsors and drug treatment centers.
To obtain the additional performance data needed to assess CETA programs, ETA is working with the Office of Administration and Mangement to improve its reporting system.
Plans call for a feasibility study to determine the management information capabilities of prime sponsors, a sample survey to meet new data requirements, and a task force to prepare a revised reporting system for use in fiscal 1980.
A standardized monitoring system for use by national and regional staffs is being planned, and program performance indicators, grant review guidelines, and program assessment requirements are being refined.
Under an agreement with ETA continued during the year, the Civil Service Commission gave CETA prime sponsors technical assistance on improving their personnel systems and helped them identify and remove artificial barriers to employment and promotion.
A new contract with the Joint Center for Political Studies will provide needed technical assistance to small governments of areas with minority populations of 25 percent or greater and high unemployment rates.
Four major youth programs created by the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act of 1977 started full operations during fiscal 1978.
The new programs were serving more than 412,800 youth at year's end.
The Young Adult Conservation Corps hires 16- to 24- year olds to do useful conservation work on public lands.
Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects put 16- to 19-year-old economically disadvantaged youth to work on neighborhood and community projects providing tangible benefits to their communities.
16- to 19-year-old economically disadvantaged youth in a designated geographic area who is in school or willing to return to school.
The Youth Employment and Training Program provides comprehensive services, with a large in-school component, for 16- to 21-year-old youth.
It is operated by CETA prime sponsors and accounts for over half of the $1 billion provided under the youth act.
The act also authorized through 1980 a wide array of experimental and demonstration programs.
These projects will test a variety of approaches, analyze the results, and develop recommendations for Congress and the President for a longterm youth employment policy.
Early evaluations of the new programs show that the Youth Employment and Training Program and the Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects have brought about substantial improvements in worksite supervision, linkages with education, and involvement of community-based organizations.
There is also growing sophistication among program planners and operators.
Local administrators are doing long-range planning, and all concerned groups are involved in the planning and advisory councils.
The new programs have also enlisted the cooperation of employment and training specialists, schools, vocational educators, private business, labor unions, community and neighborhood organizations, and other Federal agencies.
More than 60 demonstration projects and research studies were started, and over 22 projects were undertaken jointly with other Federal agencies.
These efforts are seeking answers to a number of complex questions including: Which approaches are most effective in combating youth unemployment: structured work or comprehensive human resources development programs, in-school or out-of-school programs, programs for economically disadvantaged youth, or those serving young people from families at various income levels?
How can programs improve the school-to-work transition?
Which delivery mechanisms are most effective?
How do planners measure the universe of need and what level of resources will meet these needs?
The continuing Summer Program for Economically Disadvantaged Youth provided work and employability services for over a million youth in 1978.
In arranging for jobs with different agencies, prime sponsors stressed improved work experiences with adequate supervision and increased orientation to the world of work.
A Vocational Exploration in the Private Sector program was provided to help youth relate their school experiences to actual work experiences in local businesses.
Job Corps continued efforts to double its capacity from 22,000 to 44,000 disadvantaged youth.
This expansion is being achieved by both increasing the capacity of existing centers and starting new ones in Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, New York, Pennsylvania and Virginia.
Because of site acquisition problems and delays in facility construction and rehabilitation, Job Corps has extended the planned timing of the expansion.
By year's end, almost 26,000 youth were enrolled.
Revised plans call for having about 40,000 corpsmembers by the end of fiscal 1979, with the remaining 4,000 to be added during the first part of fiscal 1980.
The Quality of Work Life Improvement Program, in its second year during fiscal 1978, continued to rehabilitate and upgrade facilities and equipment.
Job Corps served 70,500 youth, including 48,850 new enrollees, during the year.
Some 1,300 corpsmembers were receiving advanced career trainingat year's end.
Of the 45,000 youth leaving Job Corps, 28,350, or 63 percent, completed their programs.
There were 20,300 job placements at an average wage of $3.08 an hour, and 7,463 former corpsmembers entered school or the Armed Forces.
National programs for groups with special labor market disadvantages provided more community service jobs for older workers, training in high-demand skills for Indians and other native Americans, and on-the-job training in private industry for veterans.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program expanded its services during the summer to provide 47,500 part-time jobs in community work to disadvantaged persons aged 55 and older.
9 months of the fiscal year.
Authorized by Title IX of the Older Americans Amendments of 1975, the program supports jobs through grants to national sponsoring organizations and 50 State and territorial governments.
To expand the number of jobs provided, it selected three new organizations, the National Urban League, the National Center on Black Aged, and the Asociacion Nacional Pro Personas Mayores, bringing the number of national sponsors to eight.
The Native American Economic Stimulus Program, funded by 180 grants totaling $31 million for the closing months of fiscal 1977 and fiscal 1978, is training Indians and other native Americans in 15 high-demand skills.
They include paralegal, paramedical, domestic fuel, agricultural, waste disposal, and management improvement occupations.
The objective is to stimulate the economy of reservations and Alaska native villages.
This training is part of the overall program providing job training, employment opportunities, and related services to economically disadvantaged, unemployed, or underemployed Indians and other native Americans.
During fiscal 1978, some 100,000 people in all 50 States were served through projects funded by $202 million and operated by 160 prime sponsors.
Program sponsors are Indian tribes, bands, or groups; Alaska native villages; Indian communities within the State of Oklahoma; Hawaiian native communities and public or private agencies or combinations of public units that receive direct grants from the Department of Labor.
To strengthen prime sponsors' program capabilities, ETA staff provided intensified technical assistance and training in such areas as planning, administrative procedures, financial management, reporting, program development, and coordination of activities enabling prime sponsor reservations, tribes and villages to develop their own employment and training capability and provide many services previously supplied to them.
The HIRE Program arranged for more than 87,000 persons to start on-the-job training in private industry during fiscal 1978.
It was supported by $140 million, available from mid-1977 through March 31, 1979.
The program uses these funds to reimburse companies for the extra costs of recruiting, training, and providing support for participants.
Alliance of Business assists HIRE by obtaining job pledges from private employers, and many jobs are provided without reimbursement.
To expand the program as quickly as possible, $90 million was made available for CETA prime sponsors to participate in the reimbursable part of the program.
Meanwhile, continued national efforts, supported by the remaining funds, are opening up training jobs in large firms across the country.
Farmworker programs have two general objectives: to improve living standards for migrant and other seasonally employed farmworkers who want to remain in the agricultural labor market, and to help those who want to leave the field prepare for and obtain more stable and financially rewarding employment.
The programs provide many different services, ranging from job training to help with housing and legal problems.
In fiscal 1978, these programs were funded by an allocation of $75.2 million and operated by 34 nonprofit organizations, 7 State governments, and 3 city or county governments.
In addition, grants were awarded to universities and other groups for college assistance programs and technical assistance and training.
Participants preparing for skilled jobs included 16,500 in classroom training and 5,000 in on-the-job training.
Another 4,700 were on work-experience assignments, and 6,400 were in high school equivalency programs or receiving support for college work.
Some 20,000 program graduates and others were placed in jobs.
In addition, substantial numbers of farmworkers received other types of assistance, including employment and training services, emergency assistance, nutritional services, health and medical care, and transportation.
Other national efforts opened up opportunities in apprenticeship and on-the-job training for women, veterans, the handicapped, persons with limited English-speaking ability, and others.
More than 14,000 minority members and women were placed as apprentices or journeymen though the Apprenticeship Outreach Program, and over 20,000 enrollees completed on-site job training, coupled with classroom training, through the National On-the-Job Training Program.
Other national activities were: the Promotion and Development Program, which encouraged national trade associations, international labor unions and community and social organizations to participate in national employment and training programs, and the Program for Operational Support to Community-Based Organizations, which enabled the national offices of these organizations to give program and other assistance to local affiliates operating programs for CETA prime sponsors.
The public employment service (ES), now identified as the Job Service (JS) in many States, recorded substantial gains in both placements and job orders during fiscal 1978.
The number of persons placed in nonfarm jobs rose 10 percent, from 4.0 million in fiscal 1977 to 4.4 million in fiscal 1978.
Similarly, the number of nonfarm jobs listed by employers was up about 15 percent, from 7.9 to 9.1 million.
Despite the large numbers of youth under 22 placed in short-term summer employment, 56 percent of the jobs were expected to last more than 150 days.
Groups receiving special job-finding assistance accounted for significant numbers of placements: about 80,000 for migrant and seasonal farmworkers, 730,000 for unemployment insurance claimants, 520,000 for CETA participants, and more than 1.6 million for economically disadvantaged applicants.
The Job Service continued its role in implementing the President's economic stimulus program, placing nearly 1.1 million persons in public service employment and other subsidized jobs in fiscal 1978.
Besides placing over 2 million youth in jobs, the Job Service played a major part in programs operated under the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act.
It referred more than 22,500 young people in the Young Adult Conservation Corps and helped to recruit and refer youth to the Youth Employment and Training Program and Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects.
Another way the Job Service helped the Youth Employment and Training Program begin operations was by working with CETA prime sponsors to staff projects.
In addition, Job Service agencies started six demonstration projects on school-to-work transition services, particularly for minority and disadvantaged youth.
The projects are expected to continue into fiscal 1980.
Other projects worked to improve linkages between the employment service and CETA programs—a major goal for fiscal years 1976-78.
Pilot projects at nine sites across the country finished their work, and a report describing the models was nearing completion at year's end.
The Job Service helps to increase training opportunities for young people by operating 42 Apprenticeship Information Centers in 22 States and the District of Columbia.
These served over 50,000 people during the year.
Some 35 percent were minority members, 24 percent veterans, and almost 10 percent women.
State Job Services continued efforts to assure equitable services to migrant and seasonal farmworkers.
All eight indicators of performance used to compare the services for these workers and for other applicants showed significant improvement over fiscal 1977 in services to farmworkers.
In fact, the five Job Service-controlled indicators showed that services to this group substantially exceeded statistical equity with those to other applicants.
New regulations designed to protect job opportunities for American workers clarified the action that employers must take before their applications to employ aliens for temporary agricultural and logging work can be approved.
Other new regulations deal with certification of aliens for permanent employment and the complaint system and clarify the roles of ETA and State agencies in managing and operating Job Service programs.
The 4th edition of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles' was issued in January 1978.
A nearly completed supplement, the "Guide for Occupational Exploration," will relate occupational information to career areas in which jobs are grouped according to interest factor and common worker traits requirements.
To improve JS counseling services for applicants with special employment problems, a competency-based employment counseling training program was released during the year.
It is designed to increase the professional skills of counselors and their supervisors.
Automated matching systems were installed in additional JS offices to facilitate job placements.
Wherever possible, the computers and related equipment are shared with unemployment insurance programs.
By year's end, 38 systems were operating in 24 States.
As part of the continuing effort to improve the quality and range of employer services, the number of local employer committees was expanded from nearly 250 in fiscal 1977 to 520 in fiscal 1978, and 1 regional and 19 State committees were formed.
Through these committees, nearly 12,000 employers worked with JS staffs to identify problems in employer use of the Job Service and plan solutions.
Substantial progress was also made in: (1) Developing or revalidating aptitude tests that predict success in specific occupations and are free of bias against minority applicants; (2) improving tests used in vocational counseling, including the General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB), the Nonreading Aptitude Test Battery, the Basic Occupational Literacy Test (BOLT), and work sample assessment techniques; (3) developing an interest/aptitude assessment system oriented to the "Guide for Occupational Exploration"'; and (4) developing a method of administering the GATB to the deaf.
Work was started on a Spanish edition of the BOLT and a transcribing test to assess the typing skills of the blind.
In addition, research was completed on a Spanish edition of the GATB, and Job Service offices started to use it.
As part of the effort to improve employment service research, two national evaluation studies were started to continue work on research methods developed by earlier projects.
The studies, evaluating JS employer relations activities and counseling, are building on pilot efforts to develop and test practical ways of measuring the effects of specific JS activities.
During its first full year of operation, the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Veterans’ Employment concentrated on serving Vietnam-era and disabled veterans.
Placements of disabled veterans rose 17 percent, to nearly 49,000, largely as a result of activities carried out by the Disabled Veterans Outreach Program.
This increase was particularly significant in view of the severity of unemployment among disabled Vietnam-era veterans reported by an Administration review of veterans' employment problems.
Overall, 766,000 veterans were placed during fiscal 1978, an increase of 6 percent over the previous year, despite a 10-percent drop in the number of veterans filing for jobs.
The Federal contractors job listing program, requiring these contractors to list their openings with the employment service, continued to be a major source of jobs for veterans, who accounted for 150,000 persons placed, a 6-percent gain over the previous fiscal year.
In addition, 21,000 veterans were referred to training, and substantial numbers received other services, including counseling for 167,000; aptitude testing for 62,000; job development for 306,000; and referral to other agencies for supportive services, provided to 260,000 veterans.
As part of continuing efforts to assure that veterans receive adequate services at all local employment service offices, new regulations on veterans'services were developed and went into effect during the year.
As employment conditions improved in fiscal 1978, both the dollars paid out in unemployment insurance (UI) and the number of persons receiving benefits decreased significantly.
In 1978, 7.9 million persons received $8.6 billion in regular unemployment insurance benefits and an additional $1.5 billion in extended benefits, Federal Supplemental Benefits, and Special Unemployment Assistance.
A year earlier, 9.5 million persons had received $9.5 billion in regular benefits and $4.5 billion in benefits under the special programs.
The sharp decline in special benefits came as these programs ended in most or all states.
Extended benefits for the entire nation ended January 28, 1978, and by the close of the year, only five states continued to pay them.
In addition, Federal Supplemental Benefits expired April 30 and Special Unemployment Assistance June 30.
Substantial payments were made to workers whose unemployment resulted from the nation's trade policies or from natural disasters.
The Worker Adjustment Assistance program increased considerably, as an estimated 155,000 workers received about $250 million in payments.
Unemployment Assistance program, some 6,700 persons in 23 States received $6 million in benefits.
Major increases in program coverage resulted from the 1976 Unemployment Compensation Amendments, which extended coverage to jobs in state and local governments and certain jobs on farms, in private households, and in nonprofit elementary and secondary schools.
The amendments also brought the Virgin Islands into the unemployment insurance system.
Major attention was devoted to controlling benefit payments and preventing fraud.
Special arrangements were made to cross-match UI payment records with CETA allowance payment records and with those of the Social Security Administration and the Veterans Administration.
In addition, a special fraud prosecution campaign was started in cooperation with the Justice Department.
The Redwood Employee Protection Program, authorized by Public Law 95-250 in March 1978, provides assistance payments and employment services to workers whose unemployment resulted from expansion of the Redwood National Park.
By year's end, $326,000 in benefits had been paid to 74 persons.
The National Commission on Unemployment Compensation began its 2-year investigation in March 1978.
By the end of the fiscal year, it had held meetings in various parts of the country.
The Work Incentive (WIN) Program provides a wide range of services to help employable persons applying for or receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) to obtain jobs and become self-supporting.
In fiscal 1978, nearly 292,000 WIN registrants entered employment, about nine-tenths of them in full-time jobs.
Half of the new jobholders earned enough to leave welfare immediately.
The others received reduced assistance to supplement their earnings.
Resulting grant reductions amounted to more than $600 million on an annual basis in fiscal 1978, over a third more than in the previous fiscal year.
Since this figure does not include lower medicaid and food stamp costs, it reflects only part of the savings resulting when WIN registrants obtain jobs.
A Work Equity Project consolidating the WIN, Food Stamp, and general assistance programs under one agency administration started operating in Minnesota late in the fiscal year to provide a private sector job for all persons subject to the work requirements of these programs.
If sufficient jobs are not available in the private sector, these will be created in public and private nonprofit agencies.
In addition to testing the job performance of this group, the project identifies limitations on the capacity of the public and private nonprofit sectors to absorb additional workers.
Limited data on early stages of the undertaking indicate that substantial numbers of recipients exempt from work requirements are volunteering for the project, hoping to find jobs.
This significantly increased the number of persons to be served.
Four WIN research laboratories, opened during the year in Denver, Louisville, Madison/Racine, and St. Louis, are testing innovative techniques and program models developed by local staff.
One project will provide outreach and services to welfare mothers of young children to help them adjust to the labor market and avoid continued welfare dependency.
Other projects will attempt to reach and help AFDC applicants obtain employment before they become recipients and try to lower the wage differential between men and women registrants entering jobs.
Still another project will develop a working relationship with the Small Business Administration and related agencies, to increase job opportunities for WIN registrants in small firms, which are a growing source of jobs particularly suitable for registrants.
To fulfill ETA's responsibilities for the Employment Opportunity Program of the proposed Better Jobs and Income Act, an Office of Welfare Reform was established in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Employment and Training.
It concentrated on planning a series of projects to test various aspects of the jobs portion of the Administration's welfare reform proposal during fiscal 1979.
The projects will be conducted by 15 CETA prime sponsors, with at least one in each of the 10 Federal regions, selected on the basis of area demographic and geographic characteristics and other factors.
The sponsors received planning grants of about $4 million to operate the projects for 12 months.
The projects will test the sponsors' ability to place large numbers of employable persons from low-income families in unsubsidized or subsidized jobs.
The participants will be persons subject to a work requirement under the Aid to Families with Dependent Children, Work Incentive, and public assistance programs, plus unemployment insurance beneficiaries, some food stamp recipients not enrolled in other income transfer programs, and many working poor not receiving government assistance.
Included will be single parents with children over 6 years old and those with younger children who volunteer for the program.
Most jobs will be full time, but some part-time positions may be provided for single parents of young children.
Participants will also receive training and supportive services.
Actions to increase apprenticeship opportunities for service personnel, women, and minorities and to develop apprenticeship programs in additional industries and trades received major attention during the year.
Apprenticeship programs were instituted for 11 U.S. Army schools, providing training in 66 apprenticeable occupations.
As a result, some 7,075 service personnel are registered apprentices, receiving on-the-job training and keeping work records to submit to private employers when they leave active service.
The Marine Corps has registered programs in three apprenticeable occupations at the Service Support School, Camp Lejeune, N.C.
More than 54,000 apprentices completed training during calendar 1977, an all-time high for a single year.
Approximately 108,000 apprentices were registered, and 362,000 received training in programs serviced by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training and State apprenticeship agencies.
Minorities made up about 18.4 percent of all apprentices and 18.9 percent of those entering programs.
Continued priority was given to increasing the number of women in apprenticeship.
Women made up 2.2 percent of all apprentices at year's end, an increase from 1.7 percent a year earlier; they comprised 3.3 percent of all entering apprentices.
46,000 registered programs at the end of 1977, about 84 percent were conducted by a single employer without labor union participation.
Four new initiatives carried out during the year resulted in placement of 15,000 participants in apprenticeship jobs.
The objective is to provide opportunities for 40,000 trainees before the projects are completed.
Selected Industry Campaign to expand apprenticeship in industries with growth potential and stable employment which have used on-the-job training for worker advancement.
Twenty-six projects provided 13,000 opportunities in the health, medical, energy, trade, and service industries and government.
For the first time, an apprenticeship program was developed for mining, and it was recognized as an apprenticeable occupation.
Multi-Trade Committes in selected cities to give small employers administrative assistance with, and help them develop, apprenticeship programs.
Ten programs, providing 1,500 apprenticeship jobs, were developed during the year.
Federal-State Partnership to coordinate the efforts, practices, and procedures of Federal and State apprenticeship agencies and give financial and technical support to State apprenticeship activities.
School-Apprenticeship Linkage to orient high school students to apprenticeship, employ high school seniors as part-time apprentices, and assure their transition to full-time apprenticeship after graduation.
Four projects started during the year provided opportunities for more than 500 youth.
A number of recommendations by the Federal Committee on Apprenticeship improved apprenticeship training, simplified entrance procedures, and strengthened standards.
A clearinghouse on apprenticeship information proposed by the committee is being developed under a contract awarded during the year.
The clearinghouse will collect information on new methods and effective techniques in training on and off the job, examples of successful practices in managing apprenticeship programs, research and evaluation studies, and other developments in apprenticeship.
A feasibility study on setting up one-stop apprenticeship opportunities centers is also being conducted.
A pilot program in two or more cities will attempt to simplify and streamline procedures for entering apprenticeship.
The Committee worked with the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training to develop specific policies on "Labor Standards for the Registration of Apprenticeship Programs" (title 29 CFR part 29), published in the Federal Register in February.
It deals with labor standards, policies, and procedures relating to the registration, cancellation, suspension, and deregistration of apprenticeship programs and the role of State apprenticeship councils.
ETA developed recommendations for the reauthorized Comprehensive Employment and Training Act.
Other legislative work concerned extending and revising the Older Americans Act, amending the Trade Act of 1974 analyzing policy alternatives on youth unemployment and increasing private sector participation in training programs.
Also studied were options for the equitable distribution of funding resources and use of Government procurement policies to assist areas of high unemployment.
The principal evaluation effort provided the first national information on the postprogram experiences of participants in State and local CETA programs.
The Continuous Longitudinal Manpower Survey, which tracks a national sample of CETA participants, supplied data on their employment and earnings in the year before and the first year after program participation.
Other studies estimated the short-term economic impact of the Job Corps on its enrollees and analyzed of the public service employment (PSE) under CETA.
The expansion of PSE evaluation guided revisions of this program in the CETA extension enacted late in 1978.
A feasibility study of large-scale countercyclical public job creation identified a wide range of suitable activities having potential for large-scale expansion.
Other projects explored the use of nonprofit organizations for PSE expansion and transition to regular jobs, considered the role of these organizations in CETA programs, and planned operation of the Minnesota Work Equity Project.
This project is testing the feasibility and effectiveness of creating jobs or training opportunities for all employable persons on welfare who cannot find private sector jobs.
It will serve as a prototype for the Administration's welfare pilot projects.
Other significant accomplishments were establishing the Division of Apprenticeship Research and Development to work on long-range plans for expanding and improving apprenticeship and starting a series of developmental projects on labor market problems of Hispanic Americans.
In addition, ETA continued to support employment and training researchers through grants for doctoral and postdoctoral research, and the Institutional Grants Program made a fourth round of 4- year awards to universities to develop courses for the staffs of State and local employment and training programs.
New criteria were developed for classifying labor surplus areas under revised Defense Manpower Policy No. 4A, effective March 3, 1978.
The major change is the use of a variable level of unemployment, rather than the previous fixed rate of 6 percent, to classify these areas and give preference on certain Federal procurement contracts to firms doing a large part of the contract work there.
New labor market information products included the seventh edition of the "Directory of Important Labor Areas,"released in September, and a training program, prepared and field tested during the year.
The training is designed to help CETA program staffs meet sophisticated planning requirements in developing comprehensive employment plans, with emphasis on use of sound techniques in analyzing applicable labor market information.
In addition, Career Information Services grants were extended in eight States currently operating these services.
ETA's national office has opened a clearinghouse of information on technical assistance and training and a center to coordinate and direct training activities.
Clearinghouses were also installed in three regional offices, and plans call for opening them in the remaining regions in fiscal 1979.
The full system will make extensive information on technical assistance and training available to staffs of State employment security agencies, CETA prime sponsors, and other grantees, as well as ETA personnel.
An automated retrieval system, standard classifications, and catalogs make this information readily accessible to users.
The National Training Center (NTC) coordinates training activities in the national office and the Regional Training Centers previously opened in all Department of Labor regions.
A basic objective is to improve the performance of national staff in developing and providing ETA services.
The NTC trains national staff who, in turn, design and provide training courses.
Its services also include technical support to program staffs in assessing training needs and designing and providing training courses.
It supplies audiovisual and videotape materials for use in training, assists with course presentations, and helps evaluate the results.
In addition, the NTC works on the scheduling of training to eliminate overlapping or duplication.
During fiscal 1978, 904 courses were conducted at the national and regional centers for more than 22,000 Federal, CETA prime sponsor, and State employment security staff members.
A central aid in the work of both the clearinghouse and the training center is a computerized system installed during the vear to provide quick access to information needed for effective management of ETA programs.
It contains information on all directives distributed to the field, all national meetings, and all training courses scheduled by the National and Regional Training Centers.
Activities to promote equal opportunity in ETAsponsored programs were expanded in several areas during the vear.
As part of a departmentwide effort to end discrimination against handicapped citizens, the Office of Investigation and Compliance coordinated ETA's input for the Department's proposed regulations implementing Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
In addition, regulations for Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, barring discrimination based on race, color, or national origin, were updated.
Increased attention was devoted to the performance of CETA prime sponsors and State employment security agencies on equal employment opportunity (EEO), with greater national office involvement in compliance reviews and complaints investigations.
Train the trainer'sessions on Title VI of the Civil Rights Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act were conducted for ETA regional office EEO personnel.
Regional staff, along with State EEO and unemployment insurance employees, were also given training in assessing the EEO compliance of State unemployment insurance offices.
Since sufficient and accurate data are needed to assess grantee compliance with civil rights laws, national staff investigated the suitability of ETA's data sources.
Related activities were continued training of EEO field staff in the analysis of data produced by local employment service and CETA offices and obtaining approval from the Office of Management and Budget for a revised EEO reporting system.
Seven special projects were funded to increase the number of women holding responsible positions in State employment security agencies.
The Office of Investigation and Compliance also reviewed ETA programs for compliance with other legislative requirements.
Investigations involving fraud, gross mismanagement, maintenance of effort, ineligible enrollees, wage rate violations, political patronage, and political activity resulted in 25 indictments.
ETA provided a number of special services and programs for women.
Sixteen model training programs, based on Women's Bureau proposals, were funded during the year.
They test new ways of serving teenaged and mature women and rural, incarcerated, battered, minority, and low-income women.
Special consideration was devoted to the problems of displaced homemakers.
Although centers to serve this group have been proposed, review within ETA suggests that regular CETA programs can meet the needs of these homemakers.
An ETA representative participated in International Women's Decade activities and in planning for the interagency International Year of the Child observance.
In addition, the agency continued to arrange for services such as career counseling, training, and job restructuring to facilitate the upward mobility of its women employees.
As new and expanded programs started serving youth and others and increased private sector participation in job training was planned, the Employment and Training Administration's Office of Information concentrated on informing the public about these activities.
Information materials on the new vouth programs included brochures, news releases, and articles in WORKLIFE magazine.
In addition, a kit of Job Corps recruitment materials was produced in Spanish as well as English.
Similarly, pamphlets, articles, and speeches related current experience with business involvement in CETA training and informed employers about the new CETA Private Sector Initiative.
Other publications directed to employers described the new jobs tax credit and the WIN and welfare credits.
A series of seven publications on CETA Program Models advised prime sponsors on planning and providing intake and assessment, job training, placement, and other services; and a related series of CETA Title VI Project Description Reports summarized innovative public job projects.
Workshops, meetings, and a handbook gave employment service officers and prime sponsor staffs training and assistance in planning and carrying out public information activities, and the monthly ETA Interchange supplied a wide variety of information.
A comprehensive package of teaching materials on the unemployment insurance (UI) program was sent to almost 10,000 high school social studies teachers.
It contains manuals, photographs, charts, a filmstrip, and other materials designed to help students understand the causes and effects of unemployment and how the UI program works.
Reactions to the kit have been so favorable that ETA is having similar information prepared on its other programs and those of State employment services.
Major publications were the 'Employment and Training Report of the President" and the annual volume on"Research and Development Projects.
R&D monographs reviewed such topics as "Placing Minority Women in Professional Jobs,""Perspectives on Public Job Creation,"and "The Public Employment Service and Help Wanted Ads"; other publications were apprenticeship standards and technical papers exploring the labor market effects of unemployment insurance.
To improve the distribution of ETA publications, all publications were reviewed and conferences held for regional staffs.
Efforts to inform consumers included preparing leaflets on new ETA services and updating ones issued earlier.
News releases covered the entire range of ETA activities.
Other information products were speeches, exhibits at national conventions, and responses to inquiries from members of Congress, media representatives, and the public.
At the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), a number of new initiatives were begun.
Revision of the Consumer Price Index was completed and successfully introduced during fiscal year 1978.
The Bureau's statistics have been undergoing rapid change for several years to increase their usefulness, particularly in meeting the national goals of stabilizing the economy, strengthening economic growth, and implementing the sharing of Federal revenues with States and local areas in accordance with requirements of recent laws.
Stage-of-processing was established as the analytical framework for the Bureau's Producer (previously Wholesale) Price Indexes.
Two Consumer Price Indexes were published starting with January 1978: (1) a modernized version of the traditional CPI for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W); and (2) a new CPI for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U).
About 6,000 local area unemployment estimates were published for use as part of a formula to allocate revenue sharing funds to States and local areas; their quality and concepts and methodology were reviewed.
LABSTAT (Labor Statistics,)) a new on-line electronic information system to make published data available through a computer terminal, including BLS press releases and more than 60,000 data series, was initiated.
The Bureau's labor force data were under review by the Congressionally mandated and Presidentially appointed independent National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics.
New statistics were developed or expanded, such as a measure of wage change, the Employment Cost Index; measures of price changes of products imported and exported from the United States; annual data on consumer expenditures; and data on minority groups, especially Hispanics.
The prices and living conditions program provides measures of price change at the consumer and industrial levels as indicators for the economy and provides measures of living costs in various areas of the U.S.
The program also analyzes price behavior and consumer spending patterns, interprets price developments in relation to other major economic changes, and measures price change for U.S. products traded in world markets.
The most widely-used statistics in this program are monthly measures of price change for the consumer and industrial sectors.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI), the principal source of information concerning trends in consumer prices in the United States, is used in the formulation and evaluation of economic policy, in wage negotiations and in the escalation of wages, rents, pensions, Social Security benefits, and food stamp allocations.
The large-scale effort to update and modernize the CPI was completed on schedule, and a revised Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers and a new broader-based CPI for All Urban Consumers were introduced in February 1978.
Marking the completion of the fifth revision in the history of the Consumer Price Index, BLS began publication of two Consumer Price Indexes with release of January 1978 data: (1) an updated version of the traditional CPI for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W); and (2) a new CPI for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U).
The CPI-U recognizes the need for an index with broad population coverage due to growing uses of the CPI in economic policy formulation and in escalation of income payments.
The CPI-U represents about 80 percent of the total noninstitutional civilian population.
Urban wage earners and clerical workers represent about half the population covered by the CPI-U.
Others included are groups which historically had been excluded from CPI coverage, such as professional, managerial, and technical workers; the self-employed; short-term workers; the unemployed, and retirees and others not in the labor force.
The 1978 revision—the first since the early 1960's— also made more geographic detail available from the CPI program.
24 in the old index.
The four additional indexes cover Miami, Florida; Portland, Oregon; Northeast (Scranton), Pennsylvania; and Denver, Colorado.
The indexes for the five largest areas continue to be published monthly.
Indexes for other areas are published bimonthly instead of quarterly as in the past.
New regional CPI's cross-classified by population size were introduced with release of the February 1978 data and are published bimonthly.
For the first time, users in local areas for which an index is not published are able to approximate a CPI for their area by using the appropriate population-size class measure for their region.
The ability to produce this information resulted from an increase in the number of areas in which price data are collected for the CPI to 85, compared with 56 in the old series.
The new 85-area ddesign is a probability sample of urban areas based on the 1970 Census of Population.
Indexes for different regions of the country and for urban areas classified by size of population are also published bimonthly.
The reliability of these indexes as well as the national index was improved by the increase in the number of areas sampled.
Bimonthly indexes are the result of improvements made in the timeliness of the CPI data.
Prices of many commodities and services formerly collected on a quarterly cycle have been shifted to a bimonthly cycle.
Collection of prices for items on monthly schedules has been spread more evenly over the month.
In addition, pricing in the food component of the CPI is conducted throughout the month, compared with pricing only in the first week of each month in the old index.
A new rent sample, making possible the measurement of short-term changes, has improved the timeliness of the rent index.
All of these changes make the CPI-U and the CPI-W more representative of the month as a whole, and price changes that are taking place in the market place are reflected more quickly.
The current CPI data also reflect a number of other improvements resulting from the 1978 revision.
The selection and weighting of items included in the market basket were based on updated consumption weights developed from the Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted in 1972 and 1973 by the BLS and the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Several changes were made from previous surveys in sample design and collection methodology, which provided more accurate and more complete data than in the past.
Price data are collected for the CPI in retail stores and service establishments from results of a'Point-of-Purchase" household survey.
Data provided by this survey were used to develop, for the first time, a consistent, objective, and scientifically based sample of retail stores and service establishments for the CPI.
The selection of specific items priced for the CPI's utilizes a new process called 'store specific pricing.
In the past, items were priced for which detailed specifications were prepared by the Washington Office.
Under the new process, the data collector enters a store with an exhaustive definition of a fairly broad category of goods and services called an entry level item—and then proceeds systematically through successive stages to select items for pricing on the basis of sales information provided by the respondent at each stage.
A specified-in-detail item is thus selected for pricing over time in the retail outlet.
The Bureau continued to publish the unrevised CPI for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for a period of six months after release of the new and revised indexes so that those who encountered difficulty in making the transition to the new CPI-U or the revised CPI-W would have some extra time.
In addition, continued publication of the unrevised index enabled those interested to compare the revised and unrevised indexes.
In accordance with previously-announced plans, data collection and index compilation for the unrevised CPI were terminated after the June 1978 index was compiled.
The Producer Price Indexes supply the basic economic information on price changes in primary markets.
The data are used extensively in forming both public and business policy, in the escalation of sales contracts, and in economic research.
The first stage of a comprehensive revision of the program was completed with the publication of pilot indexes for four industries—newspapers, concrete products (except block and brick), home laundry equipment, and soybean oil mills.
The next phase of the revision was initiated with the collection of data for 10 more industries on a production basis.
In addition, new or improved indexes were introduced in the existing index for plastic products, industrial safety equipment, apparel, and air conditioning and refrigeration equipment.
The primary analytical framework for the data was shifted to the more accurate stage-of-processing framework.
In the International Price program, export price indexes were published that account for 60 percent of the value of U.S. commodity exports, compared with 53 percent the previous year.
Import price indexes were published for 25 percent of the value of commodities imported.
Data provided by this program were the only direct measure of price trends for U.S. foreign trade and were used by U.S. Government officials in trade negotiations and analysis of balance of payments.
In the private sector, they were used for market analysis, contract escalation, and replacement cost accounting.
Estimates of autumn 1977 costs of the four-person family budgets were prepared and published in April 1978.
In addition, the autumn 1977 costs of the retired couple's budgets were prepared and published in August 1978.
A contract was let to the University of Wisconsin Institute for Research on Poverty to assist the Bureau in convening a committee of experts to develop standards for a major revision of the Family Budget program.
Additional data for the Dairy and Interview components of the 1972-73 Consumer Expenditure Survey were made available in the form of publications and public use tapes.
This survey, the first in 10 years, provides information on consumer spending patterns in relation to such characteristics as family income, family size, age of family head, region, and other family characteristics.
The tapes are used by government and private research workers and marketing analysts.
Planning and field testing of a continuing consumer expenditure survey were undertaken.
This ongoing survey, to begin in 1979, will provide timely data on consumer spending patterns associated with family characteristics and will provide information for future revisions of the Consumer Price Index.
National attention remained focused on problems of unemployment despite strong growth in employment and the economy.
Analysis of the impact of persistent joblessness on various demographic groups and economic sectors took a number of forms.
The Bureau prepared timely analyses of the effect of economic developments on employment patterns of the Nation's workers, including articles on the employment situation in calendar year 1977 and the first half of 1978.
The level of public debate concerning the validity of current concepts underlying the labor force data was also intensified, as the Congressionally mandated National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics commenced its work in April 1978.
The Bureau actively supported the Commission's independent examination of concepts, methods, and collection procedures.
On request, the Bureau prepared a large number of special tabulations, primarily drawing on unpublished data sources, and provided special analysis of topics of interest to the Commission.
The Bureau's national and regional staffs assisted in a series of Commission meetings and hearings over the course of the year, providing both administrative support and technical expertise.
In addition, Bureau staff assessed and provided technical comments on some 30 background papers sponsored by the Commission to examine various aspects of the labor statistics program.
Advice, assistance, and technical commentary were also provided on draft portions of the Commission's final report.
At the same time, the Bureau continued to sharpen and improve its labor force data by conducting research on the conceptual and analytical methodological aspects of current labor market measures.
The Bureau began to obtain information needed on the recent job search experience of discouraged workers and other persons outside the labor force.
The new data will provide a measure of the job market attachment of nonparticipants and will be useful in considering any changes in the concepts and definitions of unemployment and labor market related discouragement.
In view of some significant changes in the labor force, particularly the increasing participation of women and school age youth and the earlier retirement of men, the Bureau produced several articles and reports focusing on labor force developments and trends among various demographic groups.
The Bureau continued to provide regular information on labor force developments among racial and ethnic minorities.
It initiated several projects and expanded its publication program with regard to labor force statistics on persons of Hispanic origin.
In response to an increasing demand for more information on this group, the Bureau has introduced several new tables on a quarterly basis in the monthly publication Employment and Earnings, with separate detail for Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, and Cubans.
The new data implement provisions of Public Law 94-311, which requires the Department of Labor to improve and expand the collection, analysis, and publication of unemployment data on Hispanics.
A chartbook with national data on Hispanic workers was made available to the public in both English and Spanish versions.
Also introduced during the year was a small quarterly publication with highlights on the employment situation for women.
New labor force projections by age, sex, and race were prepared on the basis of three alternative growth paths.
Preparations were made to expand the collection and tabulation of earnings data for the various population groups.
The new earnings series, to be available quarterly, should shed important light on the earnings of workers as they relate to the composition of their families and to the employment status of other family members.
Data from the 1976 Survey of Income and Education were utilized to prepare two reports with labor force information by region and State which is generally available only at the national level.
This information shows the extent to which persons in the various areas of the Nation participated in the labor force during the year, how long they were employed, and how long they might have been unemployed.
Also included in these reports are regional and State data on the annual earnings and the marital and family characteristics of the various groups of workers (white, black, and Hispanic).
The Bureau also continued its efforts to provide the public with clear and precise information regarding the collection, analysis, and meaning of labor force statistics.
A handbook was published on popular labor force topics, as well as a chartbook on the unemployed worker.
A popular publication, How the Government Measures Unemployment, was updated and re-issued, and an article was prepared on the BLS uses of and output from the Current Population Survey.
Over the past year, the Bureau improved its capability for accessing unpublished data from the Current Population Survey.
The individual record data were used as the basis for a number of indepth analyses of labor force behavior, especially when matched over time to create longitudinal profiles.
Significant advances were made in computerizing table production for the Bureau's labor force data publications.
The statistics on State and local area employment and unemployment continued to be the focus of attention.
They were the principal element in the allocation formulae used to distribute several billion dollars of Federal funds to States and other jurisdictions this year.
Major improvements were introduced in January 1978 into the estimating methodology including direct use of the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) data for some States and areas and more current CPS data for the remaining States as well as improved Unemployment Insurance data.
A major expansion of the CPS was begun to provide quarterly data for all States.
The program to convert industry series in the Current Employment Statistics Program (a monthly establishmentbased survey of employment, hours and earnings) to the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) System was completed.
The result of several years of work, this marks the first complete benchmark revision since the March 1974 benchmark levels were introduced in October 1975 and the first major industry reclassification since the 1957 SIC was introduced in 1961.
New stratification patterns for the estimation procedure were also introduced both for compatibility with the revised SIC and for improved accuracy in estimation.
In 1978, the Bureau developed national estimates of occupational employment by industry for manufacturing industries.
Data were collected from employers during 1977 by the 42 State Employment Security Agencies cooperating in the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey, with the Bureau collecting data for the balance of the Nation for the first time.
Funding for the development of national estimates was provided by the National Science Foundation.
The OES survey is conducted on a three year cycle, with approximately one-third of the economy surveyed each year.
At the end of the FY 1979 survey cycle, national estimates will be available for all nonagricultural industries for up to 1,500 occupations.
Pilot studies have been developed to test the feasibility of collecting data on job vacancies by State Employment Security Agencies during FY 1979.
The 1978-79 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook was published containing information on several hundred occupations.
Major improvements in wage and industrial relations programs included more detailed data on wage movements in the Employment Cost Index; continued reduction in the publication lag for wage surveys, and initial development of an employee benefits data base for use in a total compensation comparability approach to Federal pay.
Employment Cost Index tabulations were expanded to provide separate information on wage movements for such sectors of the economy as durable and nondurable manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade.
Data collection on the cost of fringe benefits continued, along with development of computer systems to process the data, leading to publication of a series on total compensation.
Work also continued on expanding the industrial coverage of the Index to include the governmental sector.
First publication of data on changes in total compensation—limited to the private nonfarm economy, excluding households—is scheduled for fiscal year 1980; published data will include governmental units the following year.
BLS conducted approximately 100 area wage surveys and 150 special industry studies for the Employment Standards Administration to use in administering the Service Contract Act.
In two of the areas, Wichita Falls and Mobile-Pensacola, the scope of the survey was expanded to include Federal, State, and local governments on a test basis.
At the request of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, a similar study including State and local governments was conducted in Brevard County, Florida.
The Bureau's regular program of area wage surveys in 70 areas was improved through refinement of occupational descriptions.
In about 200 of the surveyed establishments, data on compensation practices for supervisors was collected for the Civil Service Commission (CSC).
Also, plans were completed to expand three area surveys in fiscal year 1979 -broaden industry coverage and additional occupations—for the CSC test.
Work continued to upgrade the analytical approaches to industry wage studies through the use of regression techniques and the occupational pay matrix.
In addition, a chartbook highlighting occupational pay structures and pay determinants is in preparation.
Studies on three occupations were completed for inclusion in the annual survey of professional, administrative, technical, and clerical pay (PATC).
The occupational expansion was at the request of the President's pay agent as part of a series of changes in the Federal pay setting process.
Plans for collection of paid leave data in the PATC survey were completed.
This test is also scheduled to take place in 1979.
A full survey of occupational pay data in contract construction industries neared completion using, for the first time on this large a scale, a combination of mail and telephone data collection.
Significant cost and time savings resulted from this new approach to industry wage surveys.
Two studies new to the industry wage survey [IWS] program began last year: computer and data processing services and drug manufacturing.
The results of the sixth biennial survey of employer expenditures for employee compensation were published.
Included were national data on employer hourly expenditures for wages and salaries and for benefits such as life and health insurance, retirement programs, and paid leave.
The program of studies of employee earnings and hours of work in industries and occupations exempt from the minimum wage or overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, begun in 1975, continued.
At the request of the Employment Standards Administration, a third group of surveys of transportation industries was completed.
A survey was launched to determine the frequency distribution of nonsupervisory employees in private nonfarm industries by average hourly earnings and weekly hours of work.
The May 1978 survey, being conducted for the Employment Standards Administration, will develop data by employee age group and sex, as well as by the Fair Labor Standards Act coverage status of the establishment in which they work.
In cooperation with the Civil Service Commission, extensive research, planning, and testing was done to develop a data base and data processing system to enable the Commission to evaluate and compare total employee compensation in private industry and the Federal government.
A new edition of the Digest of Selected Pension Plans was published.
Several articles dealing with current issues surrounding employee benefit plans, such as forced retirement, maternity benefits, and changes in health insurance benefits, were also published.
As part of its regular program of reporting on wage and benefit provisions in major private industry collective bargaining settlements, BLS made a special study of cost of living escalator provisions, analyzing their incidence and yields and comparing wage settlements in bargaining units with and without escalation.
Procedures were developed and tested for collecting data on the hourly cost impact of wage and benefit settlements in public sector labor agreements.
Full-scale data collection in large governmental bargaining units was to begin early in calendar vear 1979.
Resources for this work were made available by dropping a survey of wage rate changes in manufacturing establishments, whose usefulness diminished with the introduction of the Bureau's new major wage-change indicator, the Employment Cost Index.
Planning has begun for the 1979 edition of the Directory of National Unions and Employee Associations.
Material from previous editions of the Directory yielded Monthly Labor Review articles on "Union Mergers"'and"Women in Unions.
Collective bargaining summary reports were issued prior to contract expirations for the following industries: airlines, maritime, railroads, and aerospace.
A study of national emergency disputes arising under the Taft-Hartley Act was revised and updated.
1976 has been published, and a similar report for 1977 was in progress.
Collective bargaining agreement studies on "Incentives and Production Standards"'and "Employer Pay and Leave for Union Activities" were in production.
The latter study encompassed contracts in the public and private sector.
A detailed report on earnings and demographic characteristics of union members was scheduled for publication in fiscal year 1979.
A major new source of detailed information on the circumstances associated with occupational injuries and illnesses produced its first statistical data this year.
As the Supplementary Data System (SDS) of the Office of Occupational Safety and Health Statistics (OSHS) and participating State agencies began issuing tabulations and analyses, more information became available than that provided by the Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses.
In the SDS, State personnel classify and code information on individual cases reported to State workers' compensation agencies.
The standard classifications used are selected and made more responsive to needs by BLS and the States jointly.
Maximum comparability is assured in training sessions for classifiers and coders.
Classifications include type of accident or exposure, nature and source of injury or illness, and part of body affected, as well as State and industry of the employing establishment and sex and occupation of the injured or ill worker.
Some States include other information such as medical and indemnity costs and the age of the injured worker.
Standard tabulations showing distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by worker characteristics and work situations are generated for each participating State.
BLS will analyze distribution of cases and clusters of cases with, for instance the same nature of injury, part of body affected, and industry.
The tabulations and analyses are expected to be useful in a wide variety of occupational safety and health and workers'compensation applications.
This program supplies detailed injury and illness data to supplement the Bureau's annual survey of occupational injury and illness experience with no additional paperwork burden on employers.
With the participation of 35 States which account for two-thirds of U.S. workers and after preparatory operations in prior years, the SDS was fully operational in fiscal year 1978.
By September 30, a considerable amount of information was available, including data for 1976 from 18 States and for 1977 from five States.
As program concepts, specifications, and tabulation plans were completed during the year, concerted efforts were made to assure high quality of SDS data by providing training for BLS regional and for State staffs in classification of data components, by establishing a Federal-State interpretations committee, and by a penetrating review of coding and operational procedures in selected States.
The first analytic presentations of the new data were made to the North American Conference on Labor Statistics and in an article for the Monthly Labor Review.
Special tabulations were provided on request to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration Advisory Committee on Cutaneous Hazards and to the Office of the Solicitor of Labor.
Special efforts have been made to inform potential users and to arrange for dissemination of the data.
OSHA and the States first releasing data issued press releases, BLS made an announcement, and articles describing the data appeared in the Monthly Labor Review and in Job Safety and Health.
Copies of State tabulations go to OSHA and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health as they become available.
The same data are available to other agencies, researchers, and the public through the National Technical Information Service.
The participating State agencies are encouraged and assisted in providing data and preparing publications of data analysis.
Continued demand for reduction of the paperwork burden on employers led to additional cuts in requirements for recordkeeping and reporting in the annual survey of occupational injury and illness experience in industry.
285,000 and lowered by half the average time for completion of the form.
A number of survey options were prepared which would reduce the reporting burden on employers without jeopardizing the quality and usefulness of the annual survey.
The option selected and approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) involves the reduction of sample members to 285,000.
The reduction was primarily in the small-employer low-risk group.
Reductions in paperwork involved changes in recordkeeping regulations and forms as well as in the statistical reporting.
Federal regulations covering small employer recordkeeping and changes in the forms were prepared and published.
A new recordkeeping requirements booklet, including the simplified forms, was designed, produced, and supplied to the 1.5 million of approximately 5 million employers still required to maintain records.
Because these changes affect so many employers, hundreds of mail and telephone requests for information on the changes were received and answered.
To assist in this, presentations on recordkeeping changes were made to employer and professional associations.
Employer informational items—the Audio Aid to OSHA Recordkeeping and the popular publications, What Every Employer Needs to Know about OSHA Recordkeeping—were revised.
Another change introduced into the recordkeeping regulations during the year permits access to the log of injuries and illnesses by employees and their representatives.
Regulations covering this change were prepared and published.
Annual survey data for calendar year 1977 were being collected during the year and data for 1976 were published.
A press release is issued in the year following the year of reference and a chart book and detailed report become available the next year.
The data are widely quoted in the professional and trade press.
States participating in the program release data on a similar schedule, and BLS publishes a summary of State statistics.
The national and State statistics and records are designed to provide guidance to OSHA in carrying out provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, in policy formulation and oversight information, and in specific information for employers, workers, and others involved in injury and illness prevention.
The publication and dissemination programs are designed to make the data easily available to users.
A new regulation on employee access to the log was intended to help workers use the data.
To assist employers, Guides to Evaluating Your Firm's Injury and Illness Experience, were published.
Nearly 320,000 of these guides, designed to meet the needs of specific industry divisions, were prepared with the most recent data and distributed to employers during the year.
OSHS launched a pilot survey program during the year to obtain detailed accident information not available from the annual survey or the SDS.
Specific types of accidents chosen for the study were examined in greater depth through a mail survey questionnaire to the injured employee.
Four studies were completed this year relating to ladder, scaffold, welding, and power saw accidents.
The next year's surveys were to cover personal protective equipment involved in head, foot, and eye injuries.
Recordkeeping, annual survey, SDS, and the new mail survey of injured employees all were carried out with the participation of State agencies.
The number of States and other jurisdictions participating in these programs continued to be very high, as from the beginning.
A variety of projects to complete and extend the understanding of occupational safety and health problems were undertaken by the OSHS staff outside the continuing Federal-State programs.
These were carried out directly or by contract, even by contract with State agencies also participating in the Federal-State programs.
In this area, a three volume list of hazardous-type occupational titles based on selected criteria was supplied by the U.S. Employment Service, and matched establishment data for the 1972-76 annual surveys was obtained.
Clearance was completed and project work initiated on the State of Wisconsin Medical Recordkeeping and Reporting System.
The staff helped prepare and review two President's Reports on Occupational Safety and Health during the year.
In addition to the articles already mentioned, articles were written and submitted for publication on construction safety and health, hazardous occupations, and skin disease.
Improvement of statistics on occupational illnesses continued to be a principal concern of OSHS.
Staff members continued review of illness identification problems, participated in a Departmental committee to explore disease problems through means including contracts and consultant reports, and prepared an internal report on issues and research strategies pertaining to occupational illnesses and disease.
Quarterly measures for productivity in the private economy and major sectors were extended and coverage expanded to include durable and nondurable manufacturing, in addition to the total manufacturing sector already covered.
Analysis of the factors contributing to the productivity slowdown was undertaken, including the impact of capital-labor substitution as well as demographic changes which have been taking place in the economy.
Productivity measures for laundry and cleaning services, electric lamps, lighting fixtures, electric motors and generators, veneer and plywood, and household furniture were added to the list of industries for which measures are published.
About 21 separate productivity measures are now published which cover 27 percent of employment within the private nonfarm economy—up from 25 percent a year ago.
The series of productivity in the Federal Government was refined and expanded.
Indexes for fiscal years 1967–77 were completed for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies representing 64 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
A comprehensive bulletin on international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in nine industrial countries was completed.
Also, trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 11 countries were updated during the year, and estimates of the comparative levels of compensation of wage earners in these countries were compiled.
These measures provided insights into the changing competitive position of the United States in terms of labor costs.
Studies were made of the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years on major American industries were prepared.
The Bureau completed surveys on labor and material requirements for civil works, college housing, commercial buildings, and public housing.
Surveys were begun for Federal office buildings and hospitals.
These studies measure the total labor and material requirements as well as the occupational distribution of the types of construction to serve as a basis for estimating the labor generating effects of construction programs.
In the past year, the Office of Economic Growth completed a set of industry employment projections to 1980, 1985, and 1990.
These projections reflected specific assumptions about labor force growth, unemployment, productivity changes, energy use, and changes in business and personal taxes.
Two alternative cases were examined, one showing a moderate rate of growth in labor force and decline in unemployment and the other showing more rapid growth in employment.
These projections involved a substantial amount of work on data for past years, which were re-benchmarked, expanded to more sectors, and priced in base year 1972 dollars.
Economic growth system models were also updated and expanded with more sophisticated computer programs.
Other work completed in the past year included a project for the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), linking the economic growth projections model to the EPA environmental model by providing a connection between projected macro controls and environmental requirements.
A project was also completed for the Department of Energy that developed more detailed historical and projected energy data for the Economic Growth system.
In addition, Bulletin 1989, Employment Requirements of Mass Transit, was published.
This study examined the employment effects associated with Federal mass transit grants to the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.
The Office also provided an assessment of the effects of the coal strike on employment.
BLS continued its efforts to improve internal managerial and administrative processes by expanding career opportunities for women and members of minority groups, improving the utilization of Bureau employees, and monitoring carefully the Government-wide career-ladder promotion system.
The Bureau continued its efforts to inprove employee utilization and to develop plans to improve the Bureau's performance.
With the help of a consulting firm, the Bureau made much progress in covering most of the organizations in Washington and the field in its utilization program.
Ideas were explored to determine how this effort could be integrated into the ongoing management process.
An extensive effort was undertaken to develop an Executive Development Program to produce the talent, skills, and knowledge needed by the Bureau to carry out its mission in the future.
This program was expected to be in effect by 1979.
Administrative and management improvements were made through the utilization of more advanced ADP technology.
Particular emphasis was placed on the streamlining of procedures and automating information in the Bureau's Administrative Information System, Personnel Data System, and Procurement System.
The massive effort to move data processing work to modern third-generation computers was completed.
The LABSTAT data base system gave users in BLS, including its regional offices, and other Federal agencies direct on-line access to the Bureau's data base of 100,000 time series.
OSHA stepped up its tempo in fiscal year 1978, vigorously implementing and following up on ideas and new directions initially charted during the previous year.
The momentum established with its"common sense" priorities during the first year of the Carter Administration was increased as the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) concentrated its efforts and attention on the most serious on-the-job health and safety problems in fiscal 1978.
At the same time, work went ahead on simplifying regulations and revoking unneeded ones, helping small businessmen, and better informing and educating employees, employers and the general public alike on the importance of recognizing and eliminating workplace hazards.
Nothing among OSHA's activities during the year attracted as much attention as the proposed "generic"cancer policy.
Under the proposal, OSHA sought to establish new identification and classification procedures and a regulatory framework for all workplace carcinogens.
With an estimated 1,500-2,000 chemical substances that can cause cancer present in the Nation's workplaces, more efficient and systematic means of dealing with these hazards was imperative.
The hearings on this proposal, OSHA's longest and most heavily attended, lasted from May 16 through July 25.
More than 200 witnesses, representing all sectors of American industry—labor, management, research and development, and consuming public—testified.
Volumes of written testimony and documentation were submitted.
Issuance of a final policy was expected during the fiscal year 1979.
Near the end of the fiscal year, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare announced the results of study that concluded that from 20-40 percent of all cancer cases in America were work-related and that more than 1,000 people died daily from cancer in this country.
Meanwhile, OSHA continued its attack against specific cancer-causing and other hazardous substances, promulgating final health standards on worker exposure limits for benzene, the pesticide DBCP, inorganic arsenic, cotton dust and acrylonitrile.
A final standard for lead was nearing completion as fiscal year 1978 ended.
Success in hiring individuals with scientific and technical expertise enabled OSHA to focus greater attention than ever before on health hazards.
In fiscal 1979 appropriations, Congress authorized the hiring of an additional 150 industrial hygienists and 50 support personnel by OSHA to add to its force of roughly 1,500 field compliance officers, a third of whom were industrial hygienists.
The main proposal in the area of OSHA safety standards for the year was to revoke more than 900 standards unessential for worker protection.
Many of these standards dealt with conditions no longer present in American industry; others dealt with protection of property rather than worker safety.
The final step for revoking about 930 of those 1,100 standards proposed for elimination was expected early in the new fiscal year.
Also pending was OSHA's "verticalization" project to consolidate into a single package all of the construction safety and health standards and those provisions of the general industry standards applying to the construction industry.
Both projects were consistent with OSHA's "common sense"effort of concentrating on serious hazards and simplifying regulations where possible.
The Supreme Court's decision on the Barlow case was the most significant judicial action regarding the program.
In that decision, the Court ruled that warrant requirements of the Fourth Amendment were applicable to OSHA inspections.
The Court also ruled that in seeking a warrant, OSHA was required to demonstrate that the establishment was selected for inspection under an administrative system derived from neutral sources.
However, the Court also made it clear that it felt "the great majority of businessmen can be expected in normal course to consent to inspection without warrant."
In accordance with new priorities announced earlier, and in keeping with Court guidance, 95 percent of all programmed OSHA inspections were directed at those industries with the most serious hazards.
In guidelines issued following the Court decision May 23.
OSHA instructed its field staff to continue conducting workplace inspections using the same method of scheduling as before and to seek a warrant when an employer refused entry.
The staff was told "to deal with such refusals in a courteous and responsible manner, leave the premises promptly, contact Labor Department attorneys, and obtain a warrant as quickly as possible."
From May 23, the day after the Court decision, through September 29, some 65,488 Federal OSHA and state inspections were conducted; only 769 refusals of entry resulted.
This was only slightly more than one percent, confirming the Court's and OSHA's belief that most businesses would agree to inspection without a warrant.
During the year, OSHA acted more resolutely than ever before in dealing with serious violations.
In March it issued citations for 135 alleged violations and proposed penalties totalling $228.700 against the Texaco Refinery, Port Arthur, Texas, the most ever proposed against one company.
In February, after more than 6 months of investigation, U.S. Steel corporation was cited for scores of alleged violations at its South Works Plant in Chicago, with proposed penalties of $215,900.
Other large proposed penalties were $116,000 against Farmers Export Co. of Galveston, Texas, where 18 workers died in a grain elevator explosion, and $105,100 against Research Cottrell, which was building a cooling tower at Willow Island, West Virginia, which collapsed with a loss of 51 lives.
In fiscal year 1978, OSHA inspected 57,242 workplaces for compliance with job safety and health standards.
As a result of these inspections, a total of 134,484 violations of job safety and health standards were alleged.
Of these, 36,107 were for serious, willful or repeat violations with resulting proposed penalites totaling $18,363,192; there were a total of 98,377 alleged violations of all other types, with proposed penalties totaling $332,235.
Comparisons between fiscal years 1977 and 1978 revealed a definite increase (from 14 to 37 percent of the total) in serious, willful, and repeat violations cited.
During the year, OSHA's Directorate of Technical Support was staffed and began operating.
It was established to give long-needed technical assistance to OSHA compliance personnel and to employers.
This followed establishment of the post of Field Coordinator at the end of fiscal year 1977 to bring consistency to inspection policy throughout the nation.
Responding to the inadequate attention given to education in the past, OSHA awarded $6.4 million in grants to 86 employee, business, educational and non-profit organizations for developing educational competence in job safety and health matters.
The grants, $3.4 million from the fiscal year 1978 budget and $3 million from the fiscal year 1979 budget, were the first for education and related services in OSHA's history.
The National Cancer Institute also contributed $700,000 of the OSHA grants for projects aimed in part at equipping employers and employees to fight cancer in the workplace.
The organizations, from 30 States and the District of Columbia, represented millions of workers and employers.
They were selected from 243 applicants.
In a follow-up to the previous fiscal year, OSHA expanded its on-site consultation program, with Federal funding increased to 90 percent of the cost.
Virtually every State had consultation available at year's end, either through State programs or from private organizations under contract with OSHA.
As fiscal year 1978 ended, a news column by the assistant secretary which circulates in almost all union newspapers and publications in the nation helped increase awareness of on-the-job hazards.
OSHA's efforts to guarantee worker rights under the Act continued to face greater challenges.
The number of cases under Section 11 (c), protecting workers against discrimination for exercising their rights, increased as workers became more conscious of the existence of this provision.
New regulations were issued to guarantee employees, former employees, and employee representatives regular access to the employer's log of job-related injuries and illnesses.
Under a proposed rule, employers would be required to preserve employee medical records and to provide employees access to their own as well as those of fellow workers.
These rules were designed to permit workers to know of any hazards in their work environment, what they were being or had been exposed to, and the effects of that exposure.
As the fiscal year ended, the U.S. District Court of the District of Columbia upheld the right of workers to "walk around"'pay while accompanying OSHA officials during an inspection.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce had sought to invalidate OSHA's interpretation that failure to grant such pay was discriminatory as well as contrary to the Fair Labor Standards Act.
This secured for workers the important right to meaningful participation in OSHA inspections.
The Supreme Court, at about the same time, refused to hear a case involving the right of workers to walk off their job when faced with an imminent danger situation.
OSHA believed no worker should face the choice between continued employment and serious injury or death.
OSHA was studying possible future action aimed at reversing or setting aside the lower court decision even though workers could continue to seek relief in such circumstances under the National Labor Relations Act.
In addition to the consultation service mentioned above, OSHA's aid to business, especially smaller employers, took many forms.
Many conscientious employers needed assistance in understanding their responsibilities under the law, and, with the the cooperation of small business organizations, a widespread effort was made to correct this shortcoming.
For example, more than 2 million copies of the publication, "OSHA Handbook for Small Businesses," had been distributed by the end of the vear.
This and other publications were distributed to keep business people abreast of new standards and other developments as well as to inform them of the law and of various workplace hazards.
Two of the most practical pamphlets for business were "OSHA Closing Conference Guide"' and "Employer Responsibilities and Courses of Action Following an OSHA Inspection."
OSHA also reduced paperwork, exempting employers with 10 or less workers from virtually all OSHA recordkeeping requirements; combining forms and minimizing the amount of data required; and cutting to 60,000 (compared to 191,000 in the previous year) the number of small businesses required to participate in the annual Bureau of Labor Statistics' job injury and illness survey.
Joint inspections, the sharing of laboratory facilities, the setting of research priorities and other coordinated action took place as OSHA continued to work with other Federal regulatory agencies to eliminate waste and duplication in government.
OSHA, along with the Environmental Protection Agency, the Food and Drug Administration and the Consumer Product Safety Commission, had joined to form the Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group (IRLG) shortly before the fiscal year began.
IRLG had at year's end eight work groups meeting regularly to increase cooperation and coordination of efforts.
An example of interagency cooperation came with the handling of an emergency involving the pesticide DBCP.
EPA and FDA combined resources and authority to limit worker exposure, suspend the application of the pesticide on certain crops, and monitor food for traces of the substance which induces sterility.
Another cooperative effort was underway with the White House's Interagency Task Force on Workplace Safety and Health.
The task force's goal was to develop an overall strategy for improving safety and health conditions while reducing the regulatory burden on private enterprise.
The task force, co-chaired by the Secretary of Labor and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, also included representatives from the Departments of Commerce and Health, Education, and Welfare; the Council of Economic Advisers; the Domestic Policy Staff, and the Small Business Administration.
Among its fourteen initial recommendations, the task force urged that Federal agency worksites be models for private sector efforts.
Federal agency coordinators were appointed in 10 regional OSHA offices.
OSHA also developed special training courses for Federal agency safety and health personnel, increased its support for Field Federal Safety and Health Councils and was developing recommendations to strengthen the Federal program.
Under the Occupational Safety and Health Act, at year's end, 24 States or jurisdictions had approved plans and were implementing them.
At the same time, OSHA began a thorough review of the criteria to monitor and evaluate State programs, which varied in their level of effectiveness.
A decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia Circuit provided additional guidance on the proper tests to be applied to measuring state performance.
A final order in this case was being awaited to clarify the requirements to be applied in assessing State programs.
OSHA's policy remained that no employee should be denied effective protection because of an inadequate State program.
For the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), fiscal year 1978 was one in which important changes were undertaken to improve management and increase productivity and efficiency of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP), and the Wage and Hour Division.
Each instituted reforms which resulted in increased service to the 100 million Americans who depend on ESA to protect them from job discrimination on Federal contract work; to provide benefits when injured on-the-job, and to insure that appropriate wages are being paid.
OFCCP underwent a consolidation, resulting in streamlined procedures for federal contractors and increased enforcement benefiting protected groups.
OWCP also underwent reorganization to improve the program's operation and management.
Enforcement of Federal wage and hour laws during fiscal year 1978, resulted in the disclosure of back wages due to more workers than in any previous year.
Enforcement of equal employment opportunity requirements on federal contract work underwent the most dramatic improvement in the 13-year history of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP).
A major reorganization, effective Oct. 8, 1978, consolidated all contract compliance functions into the Labor Department.
OFCCP became solely responsible for protecting the job rights of women, minorities, members of religious and ethnic groups, handicapped persons and Vietnam era and disabled veterans on Federal contract and subcontract work.
The consolidation resulted from a reorganization plan, announced by President Carter on Feb. 23, 1978, aimed at streamlining the Federal Government's equal employment opportunity programs.
Until October 1978, OFCCP functioned primarily as a policy-setting agency.
With a small national staff, it concentrated primarily on coordinating and monitoring enforcement.
The day-to-day responsibility for enforcement was scattered among 11 other Federal agencies with their own offices throughout the country.
Now, with consolidation, all contract compliance functions are unified within OFCCP resulting in more efficient enforcement activity and more responsiveness on the part of the program to the needs of the people it affects.
From the time reorganization was announced in February, until implementation in October, an interagency group, including representatives from the Labor Department, ESA and the compliance agencies, as well as the Office of Management and Budget and the Civil Service Commission worked to put into effect the consolidation plan.
Their efforts centered on the transfer of millions of dollars and over 1,000 personnel positions to the Labor Department.
During the year, OFCCP let two contracts, one for the development of a plan to establish local OFCCP offices, required by the consolidation, and the other to devise a computerized management information system.
Scheduled to open shortly after consolidation were 71 local offices in 63 cities.
One of the primary factors OFCCP considered in selecting its office locations was proximity to concentrated areas of both protected groups and federal contractors.
Local offices were to be responsible for much of the work formerly handled by the compliance agencies.
This included regular compliance reviews, complaint investigations, conciliation efforts, and technical assistance to local contractors, special interest groups and the general public.
The management information system was designed to keep employment statistics current on thousands of companies that do business with the Federal Government each day.
OFCCP would compile EEO and affirmative action data on millions of minorities, women, handicapped workers and veterans to accomplish this task.
The first, or "interim," stage of the system began operating on Oct. 8, 1978, when OFCCP's consolidation took effect.
This was a prototype of a more permanent system OFCCP hoped to complete in about three years.
OFCCP also developed a Federal Contract Compliance Manual which provided the official OFCCP policy, guidance and procedural instruction to all OFCCP staff.
For the first time, all contract compliance requirements were compiled for easy reference and available to all compliance specialists throughout the country.
The manual was made available to the public through the Government Printing Office.
OFCCP and its 11 former compliance agencies continued their strong enforcement efforts to protected groups.
Enforcement proceded at a pace unequaled in the previous 13 years.
Fourteen firms received administrative complaints in 1978, almost double the total for 1977.
Two companies were dropped from the list of eligible contractors for their EEO violations under Executive Order 11246.
The first two conciliation agreements under Section 503 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act occurred in fiscal year 1978.
In addition, an administrative complaint was issued under that law.
OFCCP completed a pilot program to determine if a number of federal contractors and subcontractors were following its EEO and affirmative action guidelines toward handicapped workers and veterans.
This experiment revealed an overwhelming number of companies not in compliance, and some problem areas in need of immediate attention.
Final regulations for equal employment opportunity, including goals and timetables for women on Federal and Federally assisted construction work were issued in April 1978.
In addition to setting nationwide goals and timetables for women ranging from 3.1 percent to 6.9 percent, the new regulations establish for the first time a regulatory framework for contract complaince in the construction industry.
OFCCP joined with the Department of Justice, the Civil Service Commission and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to issue a uniform set of guidelines on employee testing and selection procedures.
The new regulations applied to all workers throughout the country and were designed to prevent the use of arbitrary, and often discriminatory criteria, used to screen out qualified job applicants.
OFCCP also joined forces with the department's Employment and Training Administration (ETA).
Cooperation between OFCCP and ETA was expected to enhance the effectiveness of both organizations and increase the employment opportunities available to minorities, women, handicapped workers and disabled and Vietnam-era veterans.
Fiscal year 1978 also saw a dramatic increase in training activities.
Over 225 equal opportunity specialists, which included 21 representatives from State and local governments, completed the basic training course for compliance officers.
OFCCP completed a series of 10 seminars for employers to explain the complexities and intricacies of the contract compliance program.
By the time the seminars ended in August 1978, more than 1,700 company representatives had attended.
Workers covered by laws administered by the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) can expect improved delivery of services as a result of a reorganization of the program which occurred in July 1978, and many management and administrative improvements.
The reorganization was designed to improve the program's operation and management, and to centralize the delivery of services.
The new organization structure included two major units, each with a deputy director and four divisions.
Under the deputy director for planning, policy and standards were the divisions of planning, policy and review; State workers' compensation standards; medical standards and services; and automated data processing projects.
Under the deputy director for program operations were the divisions of vocational rehabilitation, longshore and harbor worker's compensation, Federal employees'compensation and coal mine workers' compensation, as well as management support staff.
During fiscal year 1978, the major emphasis in the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) program was on improving the quality and timeliness of service to claimants.
Accordingly, implementing the recommendations of the previous year's Task Force Report received priority attention.
Major results included: reducing the time period needed for rehabilitation referrals; strengthening technical assistance to agency supervisors and compensation clerks throughout the Federal Government on their responsibilities under FECA; initiating research projects to develop standards and criteria for complex employment-related diseases; centralizing mail and file activities in the district offices; providing comprehensive training to both new and senior claims examiners; updating the procedure manuals, and centralizing all hearing loss cases in a separate national office unit for specialized development and adjudication.
Protection of both the claimant's and government's fiscal and servicing interests were strengthened through several initiatives.
An investigative division was established to reduce fraud and abuse in the claims filing system.
This division has since been transferred to the departmental level as part of the Office of Special Investigations.
By year-end, almost 57 percent of the periodic roll (long-term status) cases had been reviewed nationwide.
The new Atlanta regional office became fully operational for the handling of all periodic roll cases in the region.
Quality control standards and performance goals were established for major phases of case processing, while internal accountability review procedures to evaluate progress were upgraded.
The average claims processing time was reduced by 35 percent to under two months for traumatic claims, and by 16.5 percent to under seven months for nontraumatic claims.
Implementation of the automated claims support system continued.
An automated case history file became fully operational, as did payment of medical bills with internal audit trails incorporated for speedier service of payment and more accurate accounting of benefits paid.
The automated payment of compensation benefits neared completion and was expected to become operational early in fiscal year 1979.
Augmenting the administrative management improvements was the addition of critically needed staff.
In fiscal year 1978 the Department made available 250 new positions for FECA to ensure that the initiatives undertaken and improvements recommended would be realized, and result in a streamlined, effective program for delivering income protection to disabled Federal workers and compensation to the dependent supervisors of those who die from job related causes.
Concurrent with internal improvements being made, FECA continued to experience high levels of incoming casework.
The number of new injuries reported, 200,783, and new claims received, 31,648, were almost identical to those of fiscal year 1977.
The number of periodic roll cases rose by almost 1,000 to 46,178, and the level of obligations for compensation and medical benefits rose from $550 million in fiscal year 1977, to over $625 million in fiscal year 1978, an increase of 13.5 percent.
Administrative improvement and enhanced service to claimants were the top priorities under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act program during fiscal year 1978.
A comprehensive training course for all claims examiners and supervisors was completed, as was the development of a training program for supervisory claims examiners.
Increased technical assistance to interested parties in the maritime industry on the entitlements and responsibilities under the act, and an increased emphasis on providing speedier rehabilitation servicing and closer supervision of medical case care through the use of impartial medical examiners, also occurred in fiscal year 1978.
To promote efficiency in case processing and expedite service to claimants, quality control standards and performance goals were established.
In addition, accountability and review mechanisms were strengthened.
By the end of the year, the average time to process contested cases was reduced by 4.4 percent to almost two and a half months, while the average time to complete the case hearing process was reduced by 14 percent to less than 53 days.
The establishment of a district office in Long Beach, California, made claims servicing readily accessible to the large numbers of maritime interests there.
Administrative improvements helped contend with the continued high levels of incoming workload.
New injuries reported rose by almost six percent of 217,367, while new lost-time injuries reported increased by over 14 percent to 46,798.
The volume of incoming mail rose by 15 percent to 776,000 pieces, while the number of cases receiving compensation remained almost level with the preceding year.
On Oct. 1.
1978, maximum benefits increased under the longshore act, from $367.22 per week to $396.78 per week, representing 200 percent of the national weekly wage applicable for both periods.
The black lung program underwent major changes due to the passage of the Black Lung Benefits Reform Act of 1977.
Prior to its passage, the Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation had vigorously pursued the implementation of recommendations proposed by the OWCP Task Force which resulted in decreased time required to process a claim to an initial determination.
Following enactment of the new law, the division undertook several projects to inform the public about the changes in the law.
Several teams of staff members traveled to the coal mining regions of the country to inform the public about the new law.
In six weeks they met with over 19,000 people in 246 meetings.
The Labor Department published new regulations governing the processing of claims under the Black Lung Benefits Reform Act of 1977.
These regulations included new eligibility criteria and medical standards for processing Department of Labor claims.
The Department is required by the law to review all previously denied or pending claims under these new standards.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation established eight district offices in five states.
The Johnstown, Pa., office was to process previously-denied cases, while all newly filed claims were to be initially adjudicated in the other offices, located in Greensburg, Pa.
Charleston and Parkersburg, W. Va.
Pikeville, Ky.
Columbus, Ohio, and Denver, Colo.
During fiscal year 1978, the Division of State Workers' Compensation Standards developed technical reports at the request of other federal agencies including the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and Congressional staffs.
Additionally, annual reports on State legislative changes relating to workers' compensation were prepared for inclusion in Monthly Labor Review publications and material issued by the International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commissions.
Laws in 1972 served as criteria for improving State programs.
Subsequently, there were trends in progress toward uniformity of coverage, benefit formulas and medical care.
However, adequate reform could only be realized through continuing efforts at the State and Federal levels in a cooperative manner.
Toward this end, the Division of State Workers' Compensation Standards program of technical assistance to the States, to encourage improvement of their workers' compensation programs, was expanded to provide staff in each of the Department's ten regions.
Technical assistance efforts ranged from sponsoring conferences to highlighting issues and approaches to workers' compensation reform, working with individual States in the design of information systems, and development of rehabilitation and reemployment programs.
Fiscal year 1978 marked the 40th anniversary of the landmark Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which established the principles of nationwide minimum wage, hours of work, overtime pay and child labor protection for America's workforce.
In 1938, the law covered 15 million workers.
Forty years later, the FLSA covered more than 50 million workers.
Enforcement of the act over the 40 years disclosed minimum wage violations and unpaid overtime compensation totaling more than $1.6 billion with $844 million recovered from employers and repaid to over nine million workers.
Enforcement of Federal wage and hour laws during fiscal year 1978, resulted in the disclosure of back wages due to more workers than in any previous year.
Over 60,000 compliance actions under the FLSA by the Wage and Hour Division's compliance officers disclosed $91.7 million in unpaid wages under the Federal minimum wage and overtime provisions.
Of this amount, $40 million was found to be due to 378,000 employees for minimum wage violations and $51.7 million was found to be due 264,000 employees for overtime violations.
Over $24 million was paid by employers to 316,000 workers for minimum wage violations and almost $35 million to 223,000 workers for overtime violations.
The major reason for the difference between the total money found due to employees and the amount actually restored was employers' failure to pay back wages in cases considered unsuitable for litigation by the department.
In these cases, complainants were advised of their right under the FLSA to bring a private suit to collect the back wages due, plus an actual amount in liquidated damages, as well as attorney's fees and court costs.
Wages recovered in private employee suits were not reflected in the Wage and Hour Division's statistics.
In June 1978, the Wage and Hour Division initiated a program of investigations targeted at industries and localities with high concentrations of undocumented workers.
The purpose of the program was to remove the economic incentive for employers to hire such workers through the enforcement of the minimum wage and overtime provisions of FLSA and similar laws.
In the last quarter of fiscal year 1978, a total of 837 establishments were investigated under this special program.
Back wages were found due in 55 percent of the establishments contacted.
Over $1.2 million was disclosed due to 7,000 employees and over $600,000 was restored to 5,000 employees as a result of this program.
During fiscal year 1978, there was an increase in the number of workers employed at special lower minimum wages.
The lower minimum wages, allowed under the FLSA, were designed to prevent the curtailment of employment opportunities for handicapped workers, students and learners, among others.
The increase was largely the result of the higher minimum wage which became effective Jan. 1, 1978, and the modification in full-time student certification made by the 1977 amendments to the FLSA.
The largest group of workers under certificate, full-time students employed in retail or service establishments, agriculture and institutions of higher education, increased 45 percent over the previous fiscal year.
The second largest group of workers, handicapped persons employed in sheltered workshops, increased by five percent.
Both groups comprised 98 percent of the approximately 700,000 workers employed at special minimum wages during this fiscal year.
The new Minimum Wage Study Commission, established by the 1977 amendments to the FLSA, held its first meeting in May.
The commission was comprised of eight members, two each appointed by the Secretaries of Labor, Commerce, Agriculture, and Health, Education, and Welfare.
The commission was mandated to study the FLSA and the social, political and economic ramifications of the minimum wage, overtime, and other requirements of the act.
The commission was required to report its findings and recommendations to the President and to Congress.
Back wages found due to workers under government contract labor standards law totaled over $8.1 million, exceeding 1977 findings.
These laws included the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, the Service Contract Act and the Walsh-Healy Public Contracts Act.
During the 1978 fiscal year 17,522 wage determination decisions were issued pursuant to the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts.
Of this total, 16,116 were project determinations and 1,406 were general determinations.
This compared with 13.693 project determinations and 2,182 general determinations issued in fiscal year 1977.
General determinations were published in the Federal Register for use by any contracting or assisting agency with an appropriate project.
Project determinations were issued to the contracting agency, in response to a request, for projects in areas not covered by published determination.
Under the Service Contract Act, prevailing wage and fringe benefit predeterminations were requested by Federal agencies for 38,067 covered contracts, a 14 percent increase over the number requested the previous year.
Determinations setting wage and fringe benefit standards for a wide variety of job classifications were applied to 31,512 contracts or about 83 percent of all Federal service contracts awarded during the fiscal year.
Compliance actions by the Wage and Hour Division under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) disclosed over 5,350 persons between 40 and 65 who were victims of illegal age discrimination in fiscal year 1978.
A total of $14.5 million was found due 4,111 older workers and $4.8 million was restored to 1,363 persons.
First-year future benefits (wages, pensions, health and life insurance payments, etc.) obtained as a result of enforcement efforts by the division and litigation by the Solicitor of Labor were projected to exceed $3.5 million to over 1,000 persons.
Litigation continued to play a prominent role in the ADEA enforcement effort.
Investigation cases covering over 250 establishments were referred to the Office of the Solicitor with monetary findings disclosed of several million dollars.
Several significant cases were decided during the year which established precedents regarding the use of statistics in pattern and practice cases, burden of proof and procedural issues.
Amendments were passed by Congress to substantially strengthen ADEA enforcement.
Under these amendments, mandatory retirement was prohibited, protection extended to persons between 65 and 70, and procedural changes made to insure that more cases were heard on the merits rather than narrow procedural or jurisdictional grounds.
The act's upper age limit was removed entirely for Federal employment.
Under the Equal Pay Act, nearly $16 million was found due to 18,376 workers, almost all women.
A total of $8.7 million was restored to 14,929 employees, an increase over the $7 million restored during the previous fiscal year.
Legal action was taken in several major equal pay cases during the year, including the Seventh Day Adventist Church case in which the primary violation alleged by the department was payment of a head-of-household differential to certain employees and not others.
A $650,000 back wage settlement was reached in the case.
Several significant equal pay actions were filed against large retailers by the Department.
In August 1978, the Department issued a proposed amendment to the Equal Pay Interpretative Bulletin to eliminate sex-based differences in benefits provided by employers for employee insurance policies, pension and welfare programs and other fringe benefits.
This change was prompted by a thorough review of the legislative history and purpose of the Equal Pay Act, as well as decisions of the Suprreme Court and other courts.
The Interpretative Bulletin provided that, with respect to insurance and other employee benefit plans, the act was not violated where either the plan provided equal benefits to both men and women or the employer made equal contributions to the plan on behalf of all employees.
Under President Carter's reorganization plan of the Federal Government's equal employment opportunity programs, responsibility for enforcing the Equal Pay Act and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act were to be transferred from the Labor Department to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission effective July 1, 1979.
During fiscal year 1978, the Wage and Hour Division found 14,063 minors employed contrary to the provisions of the FLSA compared with 16,021 in fiscal 1977.
The number of minors found employed in nonagricultural occupations declared hazardous by the Secretary of Labor increased from 3.152 in fiscal year 1977, to 3,674 in fiscal 1978.
Minors found illegally employed in agricultural occupations declared hazardous remained about the same, 33 in fiscal 1978 compared with 31 in the previous year.
The FLSA was amended during the year authorizing the Secretary of Labor to approve employer applications for waivers from the child labor provisions to hire local 10 and 11-year-olds to hand-harvest short season agricultural crops.
Such work would take place between June 1 and October 15 for a period not to exceed eight weeks.
The statute also stipulated several requirements that would have to be met before a waiver could be granted.
These conditions included that the level and type of pesticides and other chemicals used would not be harmful to the health and well-being of such minors; that individuals age 12 and above were not available for such employment; that employers had traditionally employed minors of this age group, and that the employment of persons in this age group would not displace job opportunities for individuals over 16.
A two-day public hearing was held in May at the request of many interested parties.
Following the hearing, regulations were issued to implement this provision, effective June 21, 1978.
Under the child labor civil money penalty provision of the act, employers who violate the child labor provisions may be fined up to $1,000 for each violation.
During this fiscal year, 966 employers were assessed nearly $1.9 million for illegally employing 8,618 minors under this provision.
This compared with 1,130 employers being assessed $1.3 million for illegally employing 7,952 minors in fiscal 1977.
The Work Experience and Career Exploration Program (WECEP) continued to aid 14 and 15-year-old minors in thier transition from school to work in 22 states and the District of Columbia during fiscal year 1978.
Public Law 93-518, as amended, requires the Secretary of Labor to report on provisions of this Act in the Annual Report of the Secretary.)
To achieve a greater level of compliance with the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act (FLCRA), new procedures regarding the division's position in relation to different sections of the statute, taking advantage of recent interpretations involving various provisions of the act, were implemented.
This allowed a more comprehensive application of the FLCRA and produced more efficient and responsive compliance actions.
A new film entitled "Following the Harvest,"which highlighted FLCRA was produced by the Labor Department.
Filmed in Florida and California, '"Following the Harvest," showed how FLCRA affects migrant workers, growers and other users of contractor crews.
The film, which employed no actors, followed a busload of workers on their ride to the tomato fields, through the hiring process, crop picking, pay time and to housing quarters.
Wage and hour compliance officers narrated the film and explained FLCRA requirements.
The film was used for training compliance officers and as an educational tool for groups and individuals interested in the law.
Areas of the statute which received particular attention during the year included inspection of housing for farmworkers to ensure that it met standards for safety and health and checking farm labor contractors for utilization of undocumented workers.
The FLCRA was the only Federal law prohibiting an employer (the farm labor contractor) from using undocumented or unauthorized alien workers.
Special emphasis was given to identifying and investigating contractors having repeated, serious violations in areas where they were most concentrated.
A computerized tracer list identified recurring violations and showed where injunctions were in effect, as well as recording all completed investigations.
The public central registry—containing the names and addresses of all registered farm labor contractors and farm labor contractor employees, who act as agents of contractors—was published each month by the Wage and Hour Division.
The division maintained a mailing list of subscribers, and registry information was also available through the Federal-State Employment Service.
Farm labor contractor registrations continued to increase.
In fiscal year 1978, 8,739 farm labor contractors were registered and 7,735 of their full-time or regular employees (who act as agents) were issued identification cards for a total of 16,474 registrants.
This compared with 11,835 total registrants the previous year.
About 36 percent of the registrants of farm labor contractors and their agent employees were in Department of Labor Region 4, which includes Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina and Tennessee; 22 percent were in Region 6, which includes Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas, and 10 percent in Region 9, which includes Arizona, California, Guam, Hawaii and Nevada.
The estimated total number of workers in registered crews in 1978 was 507,950.
A total of 3,823 investigations were conducted among growers, canners, processors, packing shed operators and other users of farm labor contractors'services, as well as any farm labor contractor employees found operating as agents of their employer during investigations of the contractors.
The Wage and Hour Division sought to achieve greater compliance with the provisions of the act by better using compliance officer's time.
Approximately 70 percent of the investigations disclosed violations of one or more provisions of the law.
Most of the user violations involved employing unregistered farm labor contractors or infractions of the recordkeeping requirements, while those of farm labor contractors and their employees were more diverse.
They involved such activities as failure to register; failure to post the terms and conditions of employment; failure to disclose to workers at the time of their recruitment the area of employment, the crops and operations on which they would be employed, wage rates, period of employment, information on transportation, housing, and insurance (which the farm labor contractor is required to provide), and any charges to be made by the contractor; employing undocumented aliens; and failure to provide proper vehicle insurance or providing unauthorized transportation.
Over $1.6 million in civil money penalties were assessed in nearly 1,500 cases in fiscal year 1978—up from $500,000 assessed in 600 cases during fiscal 1977.
Recommendations for administrative action received from Wage-Hour regional offices in 366 cases, resulted in 141 final orders of the Secretary for revoking certificates previously issued, refusing to issue new registration certificates or ID cards, or refusing to renew some and suspending of other such registrations.
This represented a 51 percent increase over the previous year.
On November 9, 1977, President Carter signed into law the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977.
Under that law, on March 9, 1978, the Interior Department's Mining Enforcement and Safety Administration (MESA) was transferred to the Department of Labor and renamed the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA).
MSHA was placed under the direction of an Assistant Secretary of Labor for Mine Safety and Health.
To lead the transition to full enforcement of the 1977 Act, several teams were formed along program area lines.
Transition team members were drawn from both staff and line positions and were balanced to provide input from a wide range of backgrounds.
Congress specified the period of transition as 120 days.
Within that period, there were more than 100 specific changes or additions requiring new policies, new standards, new regulations, new procedural instructions, new organizational structures, new facilities, additional personnel or some combination of these, all of which had to be planned and developed for implementation.
The 1977 Act contained new provisions which extended enforcement activity considerably; increased the number of complete inspections of mines; abolished State Plan Agreements under which participating States conducted metal/ nonmetal (noncoal) mine enforcement programs; specified numerous new miners'rights, and directed new or additional enforcement activities in several areas, such as mandatory training of miners, mine rescue, and toxic substances and harmful physical agents.
Agency goals and requirements were established with rigid time schedules set to efficiently accomplish the work in the 17 weeks available: December 9 for legal and policy guidance; December 16 for comprehensive work packages with recommendations for specific policies and procedures; January 9 for development of preliminary material to be incorporated in inspection manuals and training courses; January 23 for the development and start of a training program for field enforcement personnel and development of forms and documents for enforcement; February 7 for publication of proposed rulemaking in areas requiring new regulations, and March 3 for completion of training, retraining and orientation of the inspectors and field support personnel.
The substantial volume of work accomplished under short deadlines had to be of the highest quality to guarantee that MSHA effectively administered its responsibility to enforce federal mine safety and health laws for the protection of miners' lives.
Work related to the transition was assigned with the understanding that this service would be in addition to the normal duties and responsibilities of the members of the transition team.
Section 101 of the Act requires promulgation of new or revised safety and health standards and regulations for all mining activities, and places stringent time limitations upon the completion of various stages of the rulemaking process.
After March 9, 1978, MSHA focused its rulemaking action first on those standards and regulations which were necessary to insure effective and expeditious program administration.
Efforts were then devoted to those standards and regulations which were specifically mandated by the Act.
Finally, standards and regulations for which rulemaking had begun prior to the new Act were addressed.
Under the first category, during FY 1978, MSHA published an interpretative bulletin clarifying the rights of miners to accompany inspectors during inspection; final rules were published covering the identification of representatives of miners, the notification of mine operators'legal identity, procedures for processing complaints by miners to MSHA that hazardous conditions exist in a mine, procedures for processing petitions for modification of the application of a safety standard, and schedules covering the imposition of civil penalties for violations of standards or regulations in all mines.
Under the second category, during FY 1978, MSHA published proposals for the mandatory safety and health training regulations for miners and the conversion of metal/ nonmetal advisory regulations to mandatory regulations, both of which were mandated by the Act.
After public hearings, the final training regulations were published on October 13, 1978.
Action was to be completed on the metal-nonmetal advisory regulations early in FY 1979.
Regulations requiring mine rescue teams in underground mines and those providing for the health and safety of construction workers and training of construction workers were to be proposed early in FY 1979.
In accordance with Executive Order 12044 and the departmental proposed guidelines implementing the Executive Order, and to provide for public involvement at the earliest possible date, a draft of the mine rescue team regulations was submitted to affected persons in FY 1978.
Under the final category of priorities, public hearings were held on proposed standards to revise the procedure for sampling for respirable dust in coal mines and to provide for the use of new oxygen generating self-rescue units in underground coal mines.
Both standards were to be published in final early in FY 1979.
Standards providing for use of noise dosimeters in underground coal mines and those setting forth uniform procedures for recordkeeping and reporting were promulgated in FY 1978.
Final action on a set of metal/ nonmetal health regulations, including a more stringent asbestos standard, was to be taken early in FY 1979.
Final regulations on the use of explosives in metal/nonmetal mines and exposure to radon duaghters in metal/nonmetal mines were to be published early in FY 1979.
A significant change made under the 1977 Act was the requirement that all underground mines should be given a complete health and safety inspection at least four times a vear and all surface mines at least twice a year.
Thus, MSHA was faced immediately with the task of recruiting more than 300 inspectors, with particular emphasis on metal/nonmetal inspectors.
The 1977 Act increased enforcement duties considerably at metal/nonmetal mines: much more of a change than for coal mines.
A cooperative recruitment venture was conducted by representatives from various sections of MSHA—metal/ nonmetal, coal, personnel, information and equal employment opportunity.
Emphasis was placed on minority recruitment.
Thirty-five cities were selected across the country and in each a maximum publicity effort was mounted, not only in English but in Spanish, where appropriate.
Throughout the winter months, teams went to these cities to recruit inspectors.
Of the 374 additional positions authorized in the supplemental appropriations, all were filled, and 58 inspectors hired were minorities.
During FY 1978, 65,000 inspections and investigations were conducted by 1,195 MSHA inspectors at the 6,500 coal mines under MSHA's jurisdiction.
At these mines, 112,000 citations for violations and 4,000 withdrawal orders were issued.
In the 2,500 underground coal mines, the totals were 43,200 inspections and investigations, 86,400 citations and 3,000 withdrawal orders.
At the 4,000 surface coal mines, there were 21,800 inspections and investigations, 25,600 citations and 951 withdrawal orders.
A total of 21,300 inspections and investigations were conducted during this period at 12,000 metal/nonmetal mining sites by 635 inspectors.
At these sites, 52,000 citations were issued and 2,600 withdrawal orders.
In the 627 underground mines, there were 2,300 inspections and investigations with 7,900 citations and 435 orders.
In 1,300 open pit mines, there were 4.300 inspections, 10,300 citations and 452 orders.
At 3,300 stone quarries, there were 7,600 inspections, 18,300 citations and 779 orders.
At 5,900 sand and gravel pits, there were 5,300 inspections, 9,100 citations and 659 orders.
In addition, at 3,000 mills inspected by MSHA, there were 1,800 inspections, 5,700 citations and 306 orders.
To support these enforcement activities and fulfill MSHA's mandate to provide technical assistance to protect the health and safety of miners, MSHA's Technical Support activity completed 3,600 approval actions for equipment used in the mining industry; collected and stored data used in technical studies and studies of incidence of accidents and fatalities in mining; weighed 550,000 dust samples to determine compliance with standards designed to control respirable dust in mines; reviewed 300 plans for waste bank impoundments, for roof control and for ventilation in mines; conducted 300 field investigations, analyzed 30,000 samples to determine compliance with other health standards; issued 216 reports; provided 92 technical training sessions; coordinated the research in 375 projects, and assisted in the writing of 88 standards.
The 1977 Act expanded the responsibilities of the Office of Assessments from assessing notices of violations issued at coal mines to include those issued at metal/nonmetal mines.
To process the additional workload, new conference offices were established in Phoenix, Arizona, Birmingham, Alabama, Madison, Wisconsin, Denver, Colorado, and Dallas, Texas.
The data base management system was modified to accommodate the addition of metal/nonmetal mines and the requirements of the new regulations.
This system is used for the computerized retrieval of information and has the capabilbility to give a total picture of the mine against which an assessment is to be levied.
During FY 1978, the Office of Assessments began staffing its special assessment section.
This program was established to process assessments in cases where conditions surrounding the violation warranted a higher penalty and MSHA decided to waive the use of the regular assessment formula.
During the fiscal year, 130,000 violations for total penalties of $23.7 million were assessed.
Conferences were held on 16,300 cases and total collections amounted to $12 million.
A new program in the field of coal mine inspection was initiated shortly after the transfer to the resident inspector program.
Under this program, an inspector is assigned to certain mines and remains permanently at those mines for inspection purposes with the exception of the time required for preparation of inspections, staff meetings and report writing.
The inspector performs the regular required number of health and safety inspections and devotes the remainder of his time to hazard analysis and accident prevention inspections.
Two categories of mines were placed under the resident inspection program.
In the first category were mines that liberate one million cubic feet or more of methane in 24 hours or have had a gas ignition or explosion which resulted in death or serious injury during the past five years, have an accident incident rate greater than the national average, and scored less than 800 points (80 percent) in MSHA's health and safety profile of the mine.
Mines sharing a common ventilation system which collectively fall within these parameters have an inspector assigned full time to each mine.
In the second category were mines of such size that an inspection of the entire mine required the assignment of an inspector for a period of 50 days or more during a quarter.
The inspectors assigned full time to these mines are rotated every six months and the mine status is reevaluated at the end of each calendar year.
Seventy-five coal mines have been assigned resident inspectors.
MSHA provides its education and training programs to the mining community through 10 training centers and 26 field offices.
They conduct mine health and safety courses requested by labor organizations, the mining industry, state organizations and other federal agencies.
To extend training to the greatest possible number of persons, MSHA encourages the training and certification of industry cooperative instructors.
These instructors must study a particular course under an MSHA instructor and must then prove their qualifications to teach the course.
The Act requires training for all miners and industry training programs must be evaluated and approved by MSHA.
During the fiscal year, 63,000 students were qualified or certified or both through study, to work in a specialty or to teach it.
There were 1,658 cooperative instructors trained.
Additional training courses had 402,800 students in 18 different subject areas and more than 60,000 students were trained under the State Grants program which was funded in the amount of $4,000,000 by MSHA.
MSHA also produces health and safety training films which may be borrowed or purchased from MSHA plus numerous other audio-visual training aids.
MSHA films were shown to 14,500 audiences with an attendance of 355,000.
Over 1,900 copies of MSHA film prints were sold to the mining community.
Mine rescue teams are also trained by MSHA.
Fourteen mine rescue contests were held under the direction of MSHA and eleven seminars were conducted in the field of mine health and safety.
Because of the possible overlapping jurisdictions and mutual areas of responsibility, MSHA must have memorandums of understanding with 10 other agencies of the federal government.
Two major agreements were executed during the year with the Interior Department's Bureau of Mines and with HEW's National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH).
On May 1, a memorandum of understanding between the Bureau and MSHA was signed, replacing a similar memorandum of February 6, 1976.
Under terms of the agreement, research in mine health and safety is conducted by the Bureau in conjunction with MSHA's recommendations.
MSHA has an equal voice with the Bureau in the planning and development of research programs and assists in the transfer of technology developed in this research to the mining and manufacturing industries.
To accomplish its work, MSHA has 12 review committees under a headquarters committee, roughly comparable to the 12 sub-program research areas of the Bureau.
These committees develop research projects to meet MSHA's needs and keep abreast of the Bureau's on-going research projects.
On May 4, a memorandum of understanding was signed between NIOSH and MSHA.
Under terms of this agreement, NIOSH was to compile a list of harmful physical agents and toxic materials in cooperation with MSHA and others and assess their toxicity rating.
NIOSH was to work with MSHA in compiling the information necessary and in promulgating the health regulations.
A mutual program was to be pursued to approve and certify respirators.
Under a Health Hazard Evaluation program, NIOSH was to take requests from operators or from miners'representatives to evaluate potential toxic effects of concentrations of certain substances, inspect the mine and coordinate its recommendations with MSHA to make certain the recommendations do not conflict with existing regulations.
Additional memorandums of understanding were in the process of being negotiated with Labor's OSHA; Treasury's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; the Department of Energy; the National Labor Relations Board; Commerce's Bureau of Standards; Interior's National Park Service and National Mine Health and Safety Academy; and the U.S. Air Force.
Fiscal Year 1978 witnessed several significant program changes in the Department's organizational structures and staffing patterns.
This precipitated considerable administrative management activity so that the programs and people could be successfully integrated into the Department's management systems and processes.
In March 1978 the Department took on a major new responsibility when the Federal Mine Safety and Health Amendments Act of 1977, transferred the Mine Safety and Health Administration to the Department from the Department of the Interior.
That change added over 3,300 positions to the Department, 3,118 of them located in some 119 field installations.
Not as dramatic in terms of overall numbers but nonetheless significant, particularly in view of the severe time constraints for their accomplishment, was the effort to establish additional field offices and recruit the 426 Black Lung positions required to staff them.
This enabled the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs to make services more accessible to coal miners and their survivors as mandated by the Black Lung Benefits Reform Act of 1977.
While not legislatively mandated, the Department reorganized its audit and investigations activities and established an Office of Special Investigations (OSI).
The several audit and investigation components located throughout the Department, including OASAM's Directorate of Audit and Investigations, were centralized in OSI under a Director who reports to the Secretary and who is responsible for ensuring that DOL programs are free of corruption, mismanagement and financial abuses.
Within OASAM, the Department's internal labormanagement relations activities were reorganized under a new office of Labor-Management Relations.
In order to provide a greater emphasis and a clearer focus on activities related to organization and management policy, systems and practices, a Directorate of Management Policy was established.
Under OASAM leadership, the Department made continued refinements to the newly implemented, Presidentially mandated, Zero Base Budgeting (ZBB) process for use in the formulation and analysis of the Department's budget requests.
The Program Operational Planning and the Management by Objective systems were more closely integrated into the ZBB process to achieve a more direct link between program planning and performance and overall budget activities.
In education and career development, the Department, continued to provide opportunities for individuals at all grade levels.
Emphasis was placed on designing and implementing executive development programs in the DOL Agencies, and preparing Individual Development Plans for certain categories of managers and employees.
An Executive Development Program consisting of formal training and developmental assignments tailored to individual needs was developed for OASAM's supervisory, managerial, and executive employees, GS-13 through GS-15.
A significant number of program successes were achieved by the Administrative, Clerical and Technical (ACT) Program, including measured improvement in present job skills and increased numbers of participants qualifying for better jobs.
The results of the ACT Program are particularly gratifying since over 47 percent of those eligible, some 2400 of 5200 employees, enrolled.
The Department's Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Program placed special emphasis on Upward Mobility and the recruitment of women, minorities and Hispanics.
Under a special Hispanic Outreach Project over 1200 Hispanics were interviewed, approximately 400 job offers were made and 350 Hispanics accepted employment, raising the DOL Hispanic participation rate by approximately 70 percent.
In the recruitment of women professionals, significant increases were also made in all grades 12 through 16.
The high separation rate for professional level women was studied, but no general trend or specific EEO reasons for the departures was indicated.
There was a dramatic increase of approximately 55 percent in black representation at the GS-16 level; black representation rates also increased at the GS-15 level and remained constant at the GS-13/14 levels.
Complaint processing continued to improve and the average processing time for individual complaints was reduced by eight days.
Backlogs were eliminated through a reorganization resulting in more effective utilization of the EEO Staff.
Over 550 employees or applicants contacted EEO counselors and over 80 percent of these were resolved informally at the counseling stage.
The Department's occupational safety and health programs were substantially expanded and improved during the year.
Evaluations and facility surveys were conducted in 10 regional offices, 7 area offices and 9 Job Corps Centers.
There were also 6 Job Corps Center pre-activation reviews, and health services coverage was extended to include four additional field locations.
Employee health education and screening programs relating to cancer, diabetes, drug and alcohol abuse, high blood pressure, heart disease, smoking, glaucoma, strokes, physical examinations, jogging, immunizations, vision and hearing testing were conducted.
A new collective bargaining agreement was negotiated with the exclusive labor organization representing the 7,500 Department employees located outside Washington.
The comprehensive agreement, covering personnel policies and practices and other matters affecting working conditions, became effective in August 1978 for a three-year term, replacing an agreement negotiated in 1969.
An extensive labor relations training program which includes the training of Department personnel as instructors was launched.
Approximately 1,750 managers and supervisors of the Department have been trained in basic labor-management relations and contract administration.
Management Engineering Reviews within the various agencies of the Department was continued.
The reviews contributed to the development and application of staff estimating equations and related standards for OASAM Regional Offices and equations and standards for the District Offices that administer the Federal Employees' Compensation Act Program.
OASAM also continued its efforts to develop and apply the concept of Quality of Working Life (QWL) within the Department.
Agencies in order to improve employee/management communications and promote a better overall working environment which in turn should have a positive impact on worker productivity.
In response to the President's Reporting Burden Reduction Program, the Department achieved considerable success by reducing repetitive public use reports from 250 reports to 232.
The associated burden hours were reduced from slightly over 20 million to something less than 17 million hours.
Single time public use reports were reduced from 23 to 11 reports.
The first phase of the cost-sharing venture between the Department of Labor Library and Cornell University to study the informational and retrieval needs in the labor area and to establish the feasibility of developing a unified Labor/ Industrial Relations Information System has been completed.
A pilot system is being established with 2,000 on-line citations.
The final phase, which will culminate into a comprehensive service with a total of 20,000 abstracts, will be available for Departmental use by the end of Fiscal Year 1979.
New Automated Data Processing (ADP) procedures for managing major systems acquisitions were issued.
A comprehensive security program was developed to protect personal and sensitive data, ADP physical resources, and to avoid losses from automated decisions and criminal abuse was initiated.
The Department continued to grant procurement awards to small businesses and minority firms in accordance with the President's objective to triple the minority business share of Federal procurements.
Operational responsibility for the Mine Safety and Health Administration's computer facility at Denver was transferred to the Departmental Computer Center consistent with the Department's policy of centralized data processing.
Emphasis continued on upgrading and increasing capacity to meet growing data processing requirements.
Processing capabilities for the regions and National Office agencies were increased by installing larger remote processors at these locations.
Administrative and program planning to absorb over 1500 people associated with the transfer of all contract compliance activities to the Department and to find suitable office space in Washington and the field, began in earnest after the President officially announced his intention to consolidate those activities in his Reorganization Plan #1 of 1978.
With the experience gained through the transfer of the Mine Safety and Health Administration to the Department, no major problems occurred.
Regional OASAM Offices had a significant role to play in most of the foregoing activities.
In particular they made noteworthy contributions in providing labor relations training to supervisors, especially as related to interpreting and applying the new contract with the NCFLL, in obtaining space for the consolidated OFCCP program and absorbing the people from the 11 contracting agencies, as well as for obtaining space and recruiting staff for the expanded Black Lung Program.
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 continued to be a major focus of public attention, and an important part of Labor-Management Services Administration (LMSA) activities, during the 1978 fiscal year.
LMSA's Office of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs continued to work closely with the Internal Revenue Service and the private sector to keep paperwork down and make it easier for the public to comply with the law.
Local construction coordinating committees were established in San Francisco and Kansas City in addition to the existing one in Chicago.
Labor organizations reporting under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) numbered 53,492.
Of the 682 LMRDA investigations that were completed, 192 involved union elections.
Changes in military needs and in the economy resulted in reduced demand for LMSA services to secure the reemployment rights of veterans, reservists and National Guard members during the year.
A new employee protections program was initiated under requirements of the Redwood Park Expansion Act of 1978.
Congress approved legislation which replaced Executive Order 11491 (regulating federal labor-management relations) and established an independent Federal Labor Relations Authority.
Fiscal 1978 was a heavy year for collective bargaining, and LMSA served the Secretary of Labor on this area and provided labor-management relations assistance to nonfederal governments and their employee organizations.
Other activities included information services furnished construction industry and union negotiators and activities to secure the rights of workers affected by Federally-assisted mass transit projects.
The plan descriptions of 605,000 employee benefit plans were on file with the Department under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) at the end of the 1978 fiscal year.
Also on file were 554,000 annual reports for the 1975 plan year and 410,000 annual reports for the 1976 plan year.
In addition, 69,000 summary plan descriptions had been received by the department.
During the year, a number of regulations and exemptions from the prohibited transaction provisions of ERISA were issued, including final annual reporting regulations and a proposed 'prudence"'regulation for fiduciaries of employee benefit plans.
The Department increased its efforts to reduce ERISA's reporting and disclosure paperwork burden, particularly for small employee benefit plans.
An audio-visual presentation was developed to assist administrators of small employee benefit plans in filing annual report forms.
Also published were guides to ERISA's reporting and disclosure requirements, one specially designed for small plans.
Emphasis was placed on reaching benefit plan participants through audio-visual presentations, publications, and a speaker's bureau.
One million copies of a booklet explaining participants' rights and protections under ERISA were produced and distributed, as well as a pamphlet telling participants how to file claims for employee benefits.
An audiovisual presentation illustrating various aspects of employee benefit plans and the provisions of ERISA was also developed and widely distributed for viewing by plan participants.
The Department's enforcement activity was shifted from providing technical assistance and answering complaints to carrying out investigations, particularly in the area of fiduciary violations.
More staff time was allocated for fiduciary investigations, which is in keeping with the department's commitment to protect plan assets.
Special '"ERISA task forces"' have also been designated to investigate plan abuse in selected areas.
The department estimates that 2,494 investigations under ERISA were completed in fiscal year 1978, and 148 cases were referred for civil action.
There were 53,492 active labor organizations with reports on file under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) as of September 30, 1978.
LMSA completed 682 LMRDA investigations during the year, including 192 involving internal union officer elections.
The Department instituted 47 civil actions under the Act in federal district courts, including 41 involving union elections and four to compel the filing of reports by unions and others.
Forty-six individuals were charged with criminal violations of the LMRDA in indictments or criminal informations filed in Federal district courts, including 16 as a result of LMSA participation in Organized Crime Strike Forces in 13 major cities.
Forty-five persons, including some indicted in previous years, were convicted of LMRDA violations.
Two were acquitted and LMRDA charges against six others were dismissed.
LMSA received annual financial reports required under the Standards of Conduct (Section 18) of Executive Order 11491 from 2,927 active Federal labor organizations.
Of the 530 Standards of Conduct investigations LMSA completed during the year, 11 involved Federal employee union officers and 500 delinquent and deficient reports.
An Election Advisory Unit (EAU) was established within LMSA in early 1978 to advise and assist national and international unions in the conduct of their officer elections as specified under the LMRDA.
Since January 1978, the EAU has provided pre-election assistance to 41 unions, representing more than seven and a half million members, that have held or are scheduled to hold national and international officer elections in 1978.
In addition, preparations are underway to assist 34 unions slated to hold parent officer elections in 1979.
The EAU also handled numerous inquiries from union officials and members, and participated in three regional and national training conferences sponsored by unions as well as more than 20 technical assistance conferences with parent union officers and representatives.
Congress enacted legislation which replaced Executive Order 11491 (regulating Federal labor-management elections) and established an independent Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA).
This action transferred the Office of Federal Labor-Management Relations from LMSA into the new FLRA.
During the year, 1,720 cases involving representation petitions, unfair labor practice complaints and grievability/ arbitrability applications were initiated in LMSA's 24 area offices; 1,790 cases were closed and 146 representation elections were supervised by LMSA field personnel.
The assistant secretary issued 204 decisions based upon records of formal hearings conducted before hearing officers or administrative law judges and made determinations on 283 requests for review of actions by LMSA regional administrators.
Complaint cases filed by veterans, National Guard members, reservists and others having statutory reemployment rights declined during fiscal 1978 from 2,613 in 1977 to 2,288, corresponding to the decline in the number of individuals assisted in separation from the Armed Forces (231,066 in FY 1977 to 198,992 in FY 1978).
The apparent proportion of separatees who left employment to perform military service decreased slightly from 36 percent in fiscal 1977 to 35 percent in fiscal 1978.
Cases in which reinstatement was the primary issue, as distinguished from the more complex ones involving rights after reinstatement, amounted to 39 percent, as compared to 46 percent in fiscal 1977.
The proportion of cases filed that orginated from employees of state and local governments increased slightly to 11 percent from 1977's 10 percent.
Perhaps the most significant change, reflecting the country's increased reliance on the reserve components of the Armed Forces, was an increase from 31 percent in fiscal 1977 to 36 percent in fiscal 1978 in the proportion of cases relating to the reemployment rights of National Guard members and reservists.
During fiscal 1978, as a result of continuing improvement in field staff expertise, cases that had to be referred to the Department of Justice for consideration of litigation declined to 118, or 5 percent of total cases closed, as compared to 193 (8 percent) for fiscal 1977.
The reemployment rights information procedure for new veterans, conducted in cooperation with the Department of Defense, continued, thcugh at a somewhat lower level.
In Fiscal 1978, 198,992 separatees participated in this procedure, compared to 231,066 in Fiscal 1977.
These separatees were provided with basic reemployment rights information and assistance, as well as information about other services available to veterans through the Department of Labor.
Copies of the referral forms that the Office of Veterans Reemployment Rights (OVRR) received from the military separation centers were supplied by OVRR to the Veterans' Employment Service of the Employment and Training Administration to use in contacting veterans offering them assistance in finding employment if they did not have or choose to exercise, reemployment rights with preservice employers.
If the form indicated a preservice employer, as was the case with 35 percent, or 69,795 veterans, OVRR also used a copy of the form to send general information on the reemployment rights law to that employer.
Most new veterans seeking to exercise reemployment rights were reinstated in their jobs and accorded their other reemployment rights without having to file a complaint.
The Labor Department continued its policy of encouraging resolution of labor-management disputes with a minimum of direct participation.
This policy was followed in negotiations in the railroad, shipbuilding, maritime and west coast longshore industries and in postal negotiations.
A labormanagement committee in the airlines industry was given staff support.
Early warning'reports covering negotiations which could affect the national interest were provided to the Secretary and other key government officials.
The Department continued its program of assistance to State and local governments and public employee organizations to establish procedures for resolving labor-management relations problems.
Upon request, the Department provided technical assistance, information and data services, and training and conference activities to the participants in the non-federal public sector.
It conducted special training seminars for newly appointed Public Employee Relations Board members, for labor and management representatives and for third party neutrals.
It also provided technical assistance to a number of state and local jurisdictions in drafting public employee rules and regulations and in conducting representation elections.
The Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964 provides that the Secretary of Labor certify that arrangements are made to protect the interests of employees affected by urban mass transportation projects assisted by the Department of Transportation.
In the 1978 fiscal year, the department certified applications for assistance under the Act, involving projects totaling some $5 billion.
Similar responsibility was carried out under a number of other Federal statutes.
A new program of employee protections was initiated under the requirements of the Redwood Park Expansion Act of 1978.
The Division of Construction Industry Services continued maintaining the Construction Industry Stabilization Committee wage data bank and providing national contractor associations and national construction unions with comprehensive information concerning negotiated wage settlements in the industry.
Local Construction Coordinating Committees were established in San Francisco and Kansas City in addition to the existing one in Chicago.
Congressional attention focussed during the year on several areas of policy interest, including amendments to the National Labor Relations Act, civil service reform and employee protection.
Of particular interest in the area of civil service reform was the development of legislation to replace Executive Order 11491, governing employee relations in the federal service.
Interest in employee protection was heightened by enactment of legislation to expand the Redwood National Park and by the anticipated enactment of airline deregulation legislation.
Policy recommendations were formulated on these and other important labor-management relations issues.
Through weekly and special reports, the assistant secretary and other officials of the agency were kept informed of legislative and related developments of interest to LMSA.
Policy efforts were aided by a program of research and analysis.
In-house and contract research studies were undertaken also in support of the assistant secretary's role in administering the laws and Executive Order within LMSA's jurisdiction, and in promoting knowledge and understanding of labor relations and the collective bargaining process.
The research staff completed a number of studies related to the administration and enforcement of the LMRDA including a monthly update of a manual summarizing national union election procedures and containing an election timetable.
Other studies were requested by various federal agencies or members of Congress involving election appeals procedures, methods of voting used by convention delegates to elect national union officers, length of membership requirements for holding national union office and procedures in national union constitutions for collective bargaining, contract ratification and strikes.
LMSA also contracted with other agencies and outside researchers for studies on labor relations and the collective bargaining process.
During Fiscal Year 1978, the Bureau of the Census issued Labor-Management Relations in State and Local Governments: 1976" funded in part by LMSA; the Monthly Labor Review published "Union and Public Sector Supervisors: the Case of Firefighters;" and Industrial Relations featured "How Compulsory Arbitration Affects Compromise Activity,"both based upon LMSA funded reports. A number of other studies, previously contracted for, are now nearing completion. These include "Public Sector Unit Determination, Administrative Procedures and Case Law: A comparative Evaluation of Executive Order 11491 and Selected State Collective Bargaining Frameworks,""Crisis in the Composing Room: the Effects of a Collective Bargaining Agreement on Work and Retirement for Printers,""The Impact of the 1974 Health Care Amendments to the National Labor Relations Act on Collective Bargaining in the Health Care Industry"and "Current Attempts to Alter the Bargaining Structure in the Construction Industry."Already available through the National Technical Information Service are 'The Impact of Public Employee Layoffs on Unions and Union Members in New York City''and Collective Bargaining in a Changing World,"which were also completed during the year.
The 1978 fiscal year was a very busy one for the various divisions of the Office of the Solicitor as the Labor Department moved on a broad front to protect the interests of American workers.
The Division of Occupational Safety and Health assisted OSHA's Office of Health Standards Programs in preparing comprehensive new standards for exposure to several carcinogens: benzene, 1,2, dibromo-3-chloropropane (DBCP) and arsenic and for cotton dust, which causes byssinoisis or 'brown lung.
Proposals were published on OSHA's generic 'cancer policy"and on acrylonitrile (AN).
An emergency temporary standard was also published on AN.
As part of an overall program to reorganize, revise and update the national consensus standards promulgated as OSHA standards pursuant to 29 U.S.C. 655(a), two major proposals to revoke standards contained in 29 CFR Part 1910 were published in the Federal Register in December.
One proposal dealt with standards of general applicability, while the other dealt with standards applicable only to the cooperage, bakery and laundry industries.
The standards proposed for revocation were those which were thought to have no direct or immediate relationship to employee safety or health, or which were outside of OSHA's jurisdiction.
In addition, the Division provided legal services during public hearings on lead, DBCP and on OSHA's "Cancer Policy."The latter were the most extensive hearings in OSHA's history, lasting approximately three months.
In litigation other than appellate actions, the Division conducted the following activities: It coordinated on a national basis all litigation involving employee exposure to coke oven emissions and provided assistance to various regional solicitor offices in the handling of adjudicatory proceedings involving employee exposure to phosgene, asbestos and noise.
The Division also represented the Secretary in approximately 50 contested cases arising in the District of Columbia.
Attorneys prepared approximately 120 petitions for review and submitted approximately 135 briefs to the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission dealing with interpretations of health and safety standards, application of affirmative defenses, definitions of the terms "employee" and"employer'' covered by the Act, and OSHA's jurisdiction over workplaces where other Federal agencies are involved.
The Division also reviewed approximately 100 Section 11(c) discrimination claims.
Attorneys with the Division assisted in preparing draft revisions of OSHA's Industrial Hygiene Field Operations Manual and program directives dealing with such issues as safety in maritime occupations, and also provided the agency with assistance concerning Federal employee safety programs set up under Section 19 of the Act.
Appellate litigation cases have continued to increase, with over 70 pending cases in the courts of appeals, some involving challenges to major rulemaking activities by the Secretary such as promulgating standards concerning benzene, inorganic arsenic, and the permanent standard for commercial diving operations.
In a major decision last year, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of OSHA's inspection provision but held that, when an employer refuses to permit an OSHA compliance officer to enter the workplace to conduct an inspection, the Secretary must obtain an inspection warrant, based upon a relaxed showing of probable cause.
Marshall v. Barlow's, Inc., 98 S.Ct.
In addition, the Third Circuit upheld the agency's newly promulgated standard concerning coke oven emissions.
American Iron and Steel Institute et al. v. OSHA et al., 577 F.2d 825 (C.A. 3, 1978).
During the 1979 fiscal year, the Supreme Court is scheduled to consider the Secretary's petition for certiorari in Marshall v. Daniel Construction Co., 563 F.2d 707 (C.A. 5. 1977) concerning whether OSHA grants employees a right to refuse to work when faced with work conditions which they believe to be dangerous.
Legal services for the OSHA State plans function continued to be primarily evaluation of the legal framework and operation of plans approved under Section 18(c) of the Act.
Two additional state plans were certified as having completed their developmental steps.
The Colorado State plan was withdrawn by the State and the State of Connecticut withdrew its plan concerning coverage of private employees, retaining coverage of public employees.
This brings the total approved plans to 23 comprehensive plans and one public employeeonly plan.
Formal hearings were conducted in the States of Washington and Oregon regarding State standards on roll-over protection (Oregon) and scaffolding (Washington).
In addition, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit handed down its decision in AFL-CIO v. Marshall, 570F.2d 1030, January 28, 1978, holding that the "at least as effective" test used by the Secretary in determining acceptable state personnel and resource levels was improper.
This decision will require major changes in OSHA's approval and monitoring criteria.
In the area of contract labor standards the Supreme Court denied certiorari in University of Chicago v. McDaniel, 548 F. 2d 689 (C.A. 7, 1977), cert.
This was a landmark case representing the first time a Federal Appellate Court (Seventh Circuit) has held that there is an implied private right of action under the Davis-Bacon Act, 40 U.S.C. §276a, et seq.
The 1972 amendments to the Service Contract Act mandating debarment in the absence of 'unusual circumstances' had occasioned a dramatic increase in the volume of proposed complaints reaching the National Office for the deputy solicitor's signature.
Accordingly, regional solicitors and regional attorneys were authorized to institute administrative proceedings before administrative law judges in all cases in which there appeared to be no 'unusual circumstances" which would warrant relief from debarment.
The implementation of this new procedure expedited disposition of the vast majority of routine cases under the Act.
Oral argument was held in Usery v. First National Bank of Arizona (C.A. 9, No. 75–3763), an important case under Title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act pending on appeal before the Ninth Circuit.
The issues were whether the garnishment restrictions of section 303(a) of the Act apply to earnings deposited in a bank account, and whether the garnishee bank has a statutory duty to protect earnings in its depositors'accounts from excessive garnishment.
In another case involving interpretation of language in Title III, the court in Marshall v. Dist Ct. for Forty-First-b Jud.
Dist., 444 F. Supp.
1110 (E.D. Mich. 1978) adopted the Department's position in all respects, including (1) ruling that amounts withheld pursuant to an order for support constitute a "garnishment'' within the meaning of Title III, (2) that amounts withheld for support are not excluded from the definition of '"disposable earnings'"under Title III as "amounts required by law to be withheld,"' and (3) that if a garnishment for support has priority and requires the withholding of 25 percent or more of an individual's disposible earnings, then no additional amounts may be withheld pursuant to another garnishment subject to the act's general restrictions found at section 303(a).
Administrative activity in the area of child labor civil money penalties continued at a high rate.
The Division of General Legal Services filed with the chief administrative law judge orders of reference for administrative hearings, or otherwise closed, 116 cases involving assessed civil money penalties totalling $478,075.
Full administrative hearings were held in 15 cases.
Of particular significance was the administrative law judge's decision and order affirming assessment of civil money penalties in Marshall v. Royal Bar, Inc., d/b/a Ramada Inn, 77-CL-266, CCH Labor Law Reporter, Wage-Hours, Vol.
2, 31,189, which held that the size of the penalty, $350 for each of 16 minors, was appropriate in view of the motel's large size and the operator's failure to comply, after four prior promises of complaince, with the child labor provisions of the Act.
Following the decision and order in three separate cases, complaints were filed in U.S. District Courts challenging the constitutionality of section 16(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act establishing civil money penalties for violation of the child labor provisions of the Act.
Court appearances on motions have been made in two cases.
Labor Standards Amendments of 1977.
The regulations established procedures governing application for and granting of a waiver of the child labor provisions for agricultural employment of 10 and 11 year old minors in hand harvesting of short season crops.
The proposed regulations were published in the Federal Register on April 4, 1978, and a public hearing on them was held May 11 and 12, 1978.
The final regulations, published June 21, 1978, were amended on August 18, 1978, establishing preharvest intervals for the use of certain pesticides and other chemicals which would not have an adverse effect on the health or well-being of minors employed under a waiver.
Administrative litigation activity under the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act greatly increased during fiscal year 1978 with approximately 430 cases received in which hearings had been requested.
Of the cases received, approximately 409 involved requests for hearing on the assessment of civil money penalties and 21 generally concerned requests for hearing on the Secretary's determinations to suspend, revoke, refuse to issue or refuse to renew farm labor contractor certificates of registration.
Legal opinions were requested concerning the applicability of the Act to several industries or activities being investigated for the first time and it was concluded that the Act applied to the detasseling and rogueing of hybrid seed corn and to the moving of tobacco from warehouse floors after it had been sold at auction.
District and Appellate Court litigation continued at an unprecedentedly high level with the issuance of several significant opinions from various U.S. District Courts and the filing of four briefs in three appellate cases before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Cases with the greatest potential impact upon enforcement of the Act involved the Department's interpretations of the terms "personally" and "solely for his own operation"as those terms were used in exemption 3(b) (2) of the Act.
Appeals involving interpretation of the term "personally" were pending in Marshall v. Silver Creek Packing Co., (C.A. 9, No. 78-1200) Marshall v. Souza Bros.
The Department's position on the application of 29 CFR 40.51 (p) dealing with affirmative showing of bona fide inquiry concerning each prospective employee's status as a U.S. Citizen or as a person lawfully authorized to work in the U.S. was in question in California Labor Contractor League v. Marshall (U.S. D.C. ED Calif.,).
There was no significant reduction in the number of cases in the veterans reemployment rights area.
Fifty-one district court and nine appellate court cases were filed and there were 131 administrative referrals.
In the wake of Alabama Power Co. v. Davis, 431 U.S. 581 (1977), cases were being litigated in which companies attempted to distinguish their particular plan from the Alabama Power Company's plan.
Even where there was a clear and substantive work requirement in the pension plan, pension benefits were held to a perquisite of seniority under §2021(b) (1) of the Act because of the nature of the benefits.
In Horton v. Armour, 84 CCH LC 10,640, (W.D. Mo. 1978) the court upheld the particular pension plan and stated that the Supreme Court “implied" strongly that rights of veterans in pension plans are meant to be safeguarded under 22021.
In Beckley v. Lipe-Rollway Corp., 83 CCH LC 10,547 (N.D. N.Y. 1978) the court held that military service time must be credited toward pension vesting and payments.
In Turnington v. Standard Cash Register Co., 83 CCH LC 10,363 (S.D. Ohio 1977) the court held that in this non-contributory pension plan, the work hours requirement was not substantively different, so as to make the case distinguishable from Davis.
On appeal in the Sixth Circuit was the lower court's decision in Monroe v. Standard Oil Co., 83 CCH LC 10,248 (N.D. Ohio 1978), which extended the definition of an “advantage of employment" to the reservist's right to work a 40-hour week.
The court compelled the employer to accommodate the reservist, to pay for lost work time or alter its work schedules, under circumstances in which the reservist would have worked a full week, but for his service requirements.
An opposite decision was reached in West v. Safeway (D.C. Texas 1978).
In Barrett v. Grand Trunk Western Railroad, (C.A. 7, 1978) the circuit court stated that a benefit or position claimed by a veteran need not be foreseeable, that a position need not flow from a contract but can be the result of unilateral action, and reaffirmed "reasonable certainty"as a major factor in reinstatement cases.
The Supreme Court denied a petition for certorari in Cohn, et al. v. Union Pacific Railroad, 542 F.2d 650 (C.A. 8, 1978).
The circuit court had affirmed the veteran's right to immediate credit of military service time toward promotions, rather than credit following the required work period.
In international affairs and foreign trade, legal assistance to the Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance (OTAA) was the largest single activity.
These included defending against appeals by worker groups to the U.S. Court Appeals under section 250 of the Trade Act of 1974; enforcement of subpenas under Section 249 of the Trade Act in the Federal district courts; review of each administrative case as to form and sufficiency, and drafting of proposed legislation and amendments to the regulations.
Two important decisions were rendered by the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit involving the Department's interpretations of the Act's provisions.
One decision supported the Department's interpretations (United Glass and Ceramic Workers v. Marshall, No. 76-1982, D.C. Cir. 1978) whereas the other case was remanded to the Secretary for further consideration in light of the Court's opinion (UAW v. Marshall, No. 76- 1554, D.C. Cir. 1978).
Attorneys advised the Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) on legal matters relating to foreign economic policy such as the current round of multilateral trade negotiations.
With respect to international investment issues, attorneys represented the Labor Department at meetings of the United Nations Commission on Transnational Corporations, drafting a Code of Conduct for multinational corporations.
Attorneys also monitored the labor situation in South Africa and drafted policy and position papers for congressional hearing and interagency consultations.
In the legislative area, attorneys reviewed all tariff and trade bills submitted to the Department for comment.
The Employment and Training Administration increased its program activity through implementation of the President's Economic Stimulus Package and the decision to seek reauthorization of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Program.
Employment and Training Legal Services (ETLS) assisted ETA in preparing new regulations to implement the Economic Stimulus Package.
In addition, the Division was instrumental in assisting ETA in developing and implementing the CETA reauthorization legislation, particularly provisions designed to improve the fiscal and program integrity of CETA.
These efforts also included assistance in the implementation of the final alien worker regulations.
Implementation of the 1976 Amendments to the Unemployment Insurance program generated three major constitutional challenges to the extension of coverage of this remedial statute.
In County of Los Angeles v. Marshall, we were successful in avoiding the constitutional infirmity of National League of Cities v. Usery.
A final district court decision upholding the validity of the 1976 Amendments extending coverage to state and local government employees was obtained and was appealed by the plaintiffs to the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
The appeal is ultimately expected to be considered by the Supreme Court.
A conformity case on the same issues involving the State of New Hampshire is also expected to go to the appellate courts for final resolution.
Yet another major constitutional challenge to unemployment compensation coverage was commenced by a number of churches operating church-related elementary and secondary schools.
In Independent Baptist Church of Red Bank, et al. v. State of Tennessee and Marshall, we prepared and filed the government's brief contending that coverage of all nonprofit elementary and secondary schools does not offend the First Amendment rights of those churches that operate such educational establishments.
Final regulations were adopted strengthening the requirements for certification of temporary foreign workers which resulted in a dismissal of the Frederick County Fruit Growers Assn. litigation as moot.
East Coast apple harvest where a sufficient number of local workers had not been available.
Final regulations were published and implemented providing administrative hearings for the resolution of immigrant certification matters under the Immigration and Nationality Act.
This new procedure has proven to be much more effective than traditional court review absent the administrative remedy.
Resolution of complaints through administrative procedures under CETA was facilitated by a series of favorable U.S. District Court cases requiring complainants to exhaust this effective remedy before resorting to court review.
One of the primary activities of the Employee Benefits Division during fiscal 1978 was assisting OWCP in developing comprehensive regulations governing the Black Lung Benefits Program following the enactment of the Black Lung Benefits Revenue Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-227) and the Black Lung Benefits Reform Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-239).
Regulations establishing standards for the processing, adjudication and payment of claims and for the review of claims pending with or denied by the Department of Labor as of March 1, 1978, were promulgated as 20 CFR Parts 725 and 727.
Attorneys from the Division also participated in the public hearings on the Department's proposed permanent criteria for determining whether a miner is or was totally disabled by or died due to pneumoconiosis.
Litigation activity involving Federally administered workers'compensation programs increased at an unprecedented rate particularly at the court of appeals level.
In fiscal 1978 over 110 appeals involving the Longshoremen's and Harbor Worker's Compensation Act and more than 20 appeals involving the Black Lung Benefits Act were filed in various United States courts of appeal.
During this same period 10 petitions for writs of certiorari were filed with the Supreme Court in Longshoremen's Act cases.
Appellate activity under the Federal Employees'Compensation Act also reached a new high with 805 appeals being filed with the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board.
The scope of the shoreside coverage of the Longshoremen's Act as extended in 1972 continued to be litigated on a number of major points in the wake of the Supreme Court's decision in Northeast Marine Terminal Co. v. Caputo, 432 U.S. 249 (1977).
The results were mixed.
The Department's view of shoreside coverage in the shipbuilding industry was sustained by the courts of appeals with near uniformity.
E.g., Newport News Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co. v. Graham, 573 F.2d 167 (4th Cir. 1978).
In the cargo-handling industry, however, some courts agreed with the Department's view that the Act's "status test'is satisfied by all maritime terminal workers (e.g., Jacksonville Shipyards, Inc. v. Perdue, 575 F.2d 79 (5th Cir. 1978), adhering to 539 F.2d 533 (1976), on remand for further consideration, 433 U.S. 904 (1977)), while other courts took a much narrower view, in our opinion inconsistent with Northeast Marine, supra (e.g., Cargill, Inc. v. Powell, 573 F.2d 561 (9th Cir. 1978)). The extended "situs test'involving an "area" adjoining the water, also received divergent treatment.
Compare, e.g., Newport News Shipbuilding, supra (expansive view), and Brady-Hamilton Stevedoring Co. v. Herron, 568 F.2d 137 (9th Cir. 1978) (same), with Jacksonville Shipyards, Inc. v. Perdue, supra (Perdue's case) (narrow view).
Petitions for certiorari were pending before the Supreme Court in nearly all of the cited cases, and it appeared more likely that the Court would again speak to the continuing dispute.
Meanwhile, dozens of coverage questions broadly affecting other smaller, but still very significant maritime industries—for example, various aspects of marine construction—were approaching decision by the courts of appeal.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari in Director, OWCP v. Rasmussen, 98 S.Ct.
3068 (1978), reviewing 567 F.2d 1385 (9th Cir. 1978).
The Ninth Circuit, affirming the Benefits Review Board and rejecting the contrary conclusion of the Third and District of Columbia Circuits, held that the weekly rate of death benefits under the Longshoremen's Act and its extensions, computed as a percentage of the worker's weekly earnings, is subject to no maximum limitation.
In the Rasmussen case above, something more than $400,000 in tax-exempt benefits depended on the Court's resolution of the issue; several other similar cases were being held in abeyance pending the decision.
The compensation insurance carriers continued to challenge the constitutionality as well as the Department's application and interpretation of the 1972 Amendment to the Longshoremen's Act which provides for death benefits regardless of the cause of death if an employee has sustained a permanent total disability or a permanent partial nonscheduled disability, e.g., a back injury.
The carriers calculated that this new death benefits provision greatly escalated their liability in these cases and contended that in many of them the actual payout could be in excess of a million dollars.
Appeals were filed raising these issues in seven of the 11 courts of appeals.
The Department's position was sustained in the four circuits in which decisions were rendered and the Supreme Court denied one petition for a writ of certioriari.
Cases were still pending in three other circuits.
The first appellate court decision involving the employee protection provisions of section 428 of the Black Lung Benefits Act was issued by the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in Higgins, et al. v. Marshall.
At issue was whether Old Ben Coal Company discriminated against employees who, after being advised that they had pneumoconiosis, transferred to less dusty positions by not granting them the pay increases they would have received had they not transferred.
The court of appeals held that no violation of section 428 occurred since the employer complied with the provisions of section 203 (b) (3).
Several other court of appeals decisions were rendered in Black Lung cases.
In Peabody Coal Company v. Director, OWCP, the Seventh Circuit concluded that to invoke the statutory presumption [in section 411 (c) (4)], it must be established from medical evidence and not lay testimony alone, that the claimant is suffering from a totally disabling pulmonary disease, which then may be presumed to be pneumoconiosis.
The Fifth Circuit upheld the Department's position that the 1972 amendments to the Longshoremen's Act were incorporated into the Black Lung Benefits Act and that the Secretary of Labor was authorized by law to deviate from the Longshoremen's Act provisions by appointing hearing officers to decide contested Black Lung claims.
Director, OWCP v. Alabama By-Products Corp. (No. 76-2549).
In Carpenters District Council, Summit, Medina & Portage Counties, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed and remanded a district court decision dismissing the Secretary's complaint on the ground that the Government failed to reply to interrogatories seeking the names and addresses of all witnesses expected to testify on behalf of the plaintiff, and of all individuals who were interviewed during investigation.
The Government's claim of the informer's privilege had been rejected by the district court.
This case reinforced the favorable decision obtained in Usery v. Local 720, Laborers, 547 F. 2d 525, (C.A. 10, 1977).
In Local 122, Clothing Workers, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals remanded this action for resolution on the merits.
The Secretary had challenged a by-laws requirement of a seconding vote of 25 percent of those members in attendance at the nomination meeting in order to have a member's name placed on the ballot.
The District Court dismissed the complaint, holding that the complainant had failed properly to exhaust her internal remedies in that no attempt was made to amend the by-laws in question.
The Third Circuit held that the complainant had appropriately exhausted her available remedies.
The lower court decision would have placed a tremendous burden on the member in all cases in which union constitutional provisions were involved.
Locals 20, 70 and 299, Teamsters, were three cases in which the Secretary was seeking to set aside an election because of campaign contributions by individuals meeting the statutory definition of employer.
These cases were noteworthy in that, for the first time, the violations alleged concern contributions by employers who had no business connection with the unions involved.
In Local 879.
Hotel, Motel & Restaurant Employees, the Secretary successfully sued to install in the office of financial secretary/business agent the person duly elected in a rerun election.
The rerun had been ordered in a private suit brought by the complainant to challenge a ruling that she was ineligible, in which the court directed the union to mail a letter to its members informing them that the complainant was a qualified candidate.
The union overturned the rerun election on the ground that this letter constituted an illegal use of union funds to promote the complainant's candidacy.
The court held this mailing not a violation since it was sent pursuant to a court order and ordered that the complainant be installed in office.
In Local 5, Hotel, Motel & Restaurant Employees, Hawaii, a serious conflict arose.
After the Secretary settled an election case on the local's agreement to hold an immediate election under his supervision, the local officers refused to comply with the supervisor's orders.
When the Secretary sought a contempt order, the International put the local into trusteeship at its request and sought to dismiss the contempt action and the election case on the grounds of mootness.
The case was set for hearing in early October.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) continued to make the greatest demands on the Labor and Civil Rights Division.
During the past year, the Division filed 14 administrative complaints under Executive Order 11246, as amended; obtained recommended debarment decisions by administrative law judges in four enforcement cases [U.S. DOL v. Uniroyal, Inc., Case No. OFCCP 1977-1; U.S. Depts. of H.U.D. and H.E.W. v. Painting Corporation of Detroit, Inc. Warren, Michigan, Case No. EO-77-1-CC; U.S. Dept. of Treasury v. National Bank of Commerce of San Antonio, Case No. 77-OFCCP-2; and U.S. Dept. HUD v. PFG & Sons Builders and Sons Builders and Contractors, Inc., Case No. E0-78-2-CC]; obtained one consent decree in which the company admitted violations of Executive Order 11246, as amended, and the Administrative law judge retained jurisdiction [U.S. Depts. of HEW and HUD v. Douglas Electric Company, case No. 78- OFCCP-4]; obtained two debarments [U.S. Depts. of H.U.D. and HEW v. Painting Corporation of Detroit, Inc., Warren, Michigan, Case No. EO-77-1-CC; and American Sanitary Sales and Service Co., Inc., No. CC-5]; won a motion for summary judgment [U.S. Dept of HUD v. S.T.C. Construction Co., Case No. 77-OFCCP-5]; and completed trials in two other cases in which decisions by the administrative law judges were pending [DOD.
Agency v. Hughes Aircraft Company, Case No. 78- OFCCP-3].
In addition, the Division represented the Department in more than 12 defensive cases in Federal Court, which cases challenged such matters as OFCCP's contractor pass over provisions and the scope of Executive Order coverage.
Important new regulations covering construction contractors affirmative action requirements were issued on April 7, 1978, establishing standardized EEO requirements including female employment goals.
One of the most significant cases in which the Division was involved during the year was U.S. DOL v. Uniroyal, Inc., Case No.
The administrative law judge issued recommended findings of fact and conclusions of law in the Department's action against Uniroyal, Inc., recommending that Uniroyal, Inc., have its contracts cancelled, terminated and suspended and that the contractor lose its eligibility status to contract with the Federal Government in the future.
The court held that Uniroyal violated E.O. 11246, as amended and its contractual agreement with the Government by illegally failing to truthfully respond to interrogatories, failing to produce management officials at depositions though duly noticed, and by failing to answer requests for admissions.
The judge also found that there was overwhelming evidence that Uniroyal maintained a sex-segregated workplace through at least November, 1970.
Exceptions to the judge's recommendations were filed and a final determination by the Secretary of Labor was anticipated.
There were a number of important developments in the area of reverse-Freedom of Information Act lawsuits, i.e. cases brought by contractors who had furnished equal employment statistics to the government and who sought to restrain the Secretary of Labor and other officials from making the information available to the public.
In cases in which this Division participated in the trial and appeal, the Courts of Appeals for the Seventh and Eighth Circuits have upheld the Government's position that review of a decision to disclose should be limited to the administrative record to determine whether the agency action was arbitrary or capricious.
In addition, the Supreme Court has granted certiorari in Chrysler Corporation v. Brown which was to be argued the next term.
The Solicitor General did not oppose Chrysler's petition for certiorari, urging the Court to hear the case to clarify the law in reverse FOIA cases.
Regulations on equal opportunity in apprenticeship were amended to require apprenticeship program sponsors to establish goals and timetables for women.
More than 1,000 comments on the proposed regulation were received from most major construction unions, contractors associations and women's organizations.
In the first administrative hearing to be held under Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 in OFCCP, U.S. DOL v. E.E. Black, LTD. and General Contractors Assn.
Hawaii Employers Council, Case No. 77-OFCCP-7R, the administrative law judge issued a recommended decision against OFCCP.
Exceptions to that decision were being prepared for submission to the Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards.
Three cases in which administrative complaints had been filed under Section 503 were settled, including monetary relief for the complainant in each.
In the labor relations area, the division continued to represent the Department in District Court in the Black Employees Defense Fund v. Usery lawsuit, which involved over 40 allegations of race discrimination by the Department in its Atlanta region.
Although a settlement agreement had been provisionally approved by the court, the court also granted full party status to a class of intervenors.
Discovery was still underway pending a fairness hearing regarding the provisional settlement.
On February 1, 1978, the Secretary filed suit in the Northern District of Illinois against 17 former trustees of the Teamsters Central States, Southeast and Southwest Areas Pension Fund and two former employees of the Fund, Marshall v. Fitzsimmons et al. (C.A. No. 78 C 342).
The complaint alleged that the defendants violated their fiduciary duties by managing plan assets imprudently and identified questionable real estate loans totalling in excess of one hundred million dollars.
The suit sought to hold the defendants personally liable for all losses to the Fund resulting from their fiduciary violations.
The suit represented the culmination of an extensive investigation of the Fund by the Department.
A related investigation into the operation of the Central States, Southeast and Southwest Areas Health and Welfare Fund was continuing, and on July 18, 1978, the Secretary successfully obtained court enforcement of an administrative subpeona issued as part of that investigation (Marshall v. Baker, C.A. No. 78 C 2449, N.D. IlI.).
Another significant enforcement action initiated and successfully concluded by the Secretary in the Eastern District of New York was Marshall v. Local 282 Pension Trust Fund.
On March 23, 1978, the Secretary filed suit to enjoin the trustees of a Teamsters pension plan from consummating two proposed real estate loans.
The complaint alleged that the trustees would violate ERISA's prudence and diversification requirements by loaning $20 million from total plan assets of $55 million to finance the construction of a Las Vegas casino and loaning an additional $15 million to the same borrower to purchase vacant land then owned by the plan.
On August 11, 1978, the Court enjoined the plan trustees from going forward with the loan transactions.
On February 21, 1978, the district court issued its opinion in Winpisinger v. Aurora Corp. (C.A. No. C 75- 589–N.D. Ohio), a case in which the Secretary had intervened as a defendant on the side of non-union participants of the I.A.M.
National Pension Plan.
After the Aurora Corporation closed one of its plants, plan trustees cancelled the past service credits of the non-union employees of the corporation, thus effectively denying many of these participants vested rights to receive pension benefits.
The court held, as the Secretary had urged.
On May 8, 1978, the Secretary filed suit in the Northern District of Ohio against current and former trustees of five employee benefit plans sponsored by the Associated Trades and Crafts National Union and its Local No. 2 of Youngstown, Ohio.
Marshall v. Williams (C.A. No. C 78-82 Y).
The suit alleges that the defendants violated ERISA by using the assets of the plans to benefit the union and by failing to keep adequate records or file reports required by ERISA.
On August 29, 1978, by consent of the parties, the court entered an order appointing an independent receiver to manage the plans pending the trial in this action.
On September 19, 1978, the Secretary filed suit in the District of New Hampshire, Marshall v. Loeb (C.A. No. 78-311) against fiduciaries of the Manchester Union Leader Retirement Profit Sharing Plan.
The suit alleged that the defendants violated their fiduciary duties by causing the plan to sell a printing press to the Union Leader Corporation on terms which did not adequately protect plan interests and by failing to perfect a security interest in the printing press which the plan obtained as a result of its financing the sale.
In addition to litigation initiated by the Department of Labor, the Division represented the Secretary as amicus curiae in a number of cases raising questions of law having an important impact on the administration of ERISA.
In National Carrier's Conference Committee v. Heffernan, (C.A. No. N-77–191, D. Conn.) the Secretary, at the invitation of the court, filed an amicus brief which took the position that a state statute imposing a tax on benefits paid by a welfare plan was preempted by ERISA; the court's opinion agreed with this position.
In March 1978, the Solicitor General filed a memorandum in the Supreme Court expressing the views of the United States and the Secretary of Labor in Wadsworth v. Whaland (Nos. 77-765 and 77–772) that a New Hampshire statute which regulated the contents of group insurance policies, some of which were purchased by welfare plans covered by ERISA, was saved from preemption by §514(b) (2) (A) of ERISA as a valid state regulation of insurance; the Court declined to review the case, thus leaving unaffected an appellate court decision consistent with the Secretary's position.
In January 1978, the Solicitor General, at the request of the Department of Labor, filed a memorandum urging the Supreme Court to grant certiorari to review the decision of a federal appellate court in Daniel v. International Brotherhood of Teamsters (Nos. 77-753 and 77–754), holding the federal securities laws inapplicable to an employee's participation in an involuntary, noncontributory pension plan.