THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY for Water and Power Development discharges the duties of the Secretary with respect to the Department's program in the field of water and power development.
Secretarial direction and supervision is exercised by the Assistant Secretary over the Bureau of Reclamation, Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, Southwestern Power Administration, and Office of Saline Water.
The Bureau of Reclamation constructs water-use projects whose primary purpose is the reclamation of arid and semiarid lands in the West, markets electric power produced at water resource projects of the Corps of Engineers in the 17 Western States, except for the Pacific Northwest area, and operates several high-voltage transmission systems in the West.
Bonneville Power Administration markets power produced at projects of the Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation in the Pacific Northwest and it also operates an extensive high-voltage transmission system.
Southeastern Power Administration and Southwestern Power Administration market power from Corps of Engineers projects in the Southeastern and the central Southwest areas, respectively.
The latter operates a high-voltage transmission system.
Southeastern markets power at the projects or uses wheeling arrangements.
Includes purchased energy.
The Office of Saline Water develops low-cost processes for the conversion of salt water to fresh water and constructs and operates facilities to test these processes.
The following table, prepared on a consolidated basis for fiscal year 1960, summarizes the marketing of hydroelectric power by Department of the Interior agencies.
The Assistant Secretary is responsible for the defense functions with respect to electric power which have been delegated to the Secretary by the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization.
To carry out this program, a field organization has been established to handle certain postattack power problems.
Some 40 directors and assistants have been appointed to head the 16 power areas in this organization and approximately 2,000 power liaison officers to Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization regional offices and to State and local governments have been designated.
Personnel of electric utilities were trained in radiological defense.
A survey of normal inventories and uses of electrie survival items has been completed, and data with respect to generating plants and substations is nearing completion.
Canadian Columbia River Storage, an international study; participated in interagency conferences on the coordination of watershed, flood-control, and reclamation programs.
He conducted conferences in the field and in Washington on power marketing and irrigation development, attended by water and power users, congressional delegations, and representatives of local interests and industry, and testified before congressional committees.
Specialized power studies by the Technical Inter-Agency Power Group for National Defense were made in southern California, the Pacific Northwest and Alaska.
Outstanding among these accomplishments was a program for implementing firm power supply through 1963 in the Missouri River Basin, developing a marketing plan in the Colorado storage project service area, and studies for marketing of surplus Pacific Northwest power in the northern California area.
During the year, the office of the Assistant Secretary reviewed 73 reports of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, primarily for flood control and navigation improvements; 35 Federal Power Commission applications for permits and licenses for hydroelectric developments; and 39 Department of Agriculture watershed work plans.
Staff of the Office served as Departmental representatives on interagency committees concerned with radio frequency allocation, procurement of heavy electrical equipment, international water developments, the International St. Croix River Engineering Board, public works planning, financial practices for water and power projects, economic analyses, atomic energy, and national technical society committees.
INCREASED WATER SUPPLIES for homes, farms, and industry in the semiarid West, and other major multiple-purpose benefits of regional and national importance were provided by the extensive planning and construction program of the Bureau of Reclamation of the Department of the Interior during fiscal year 1960.
During the year, the Bureau's project development program involved preparation of comprehensive plans for development of river basin resources and investigation and planning of potential projects to meet the requirements of the fast growing population of the West which is dependent on limited water resources.
Under its construction program for the fiscal year, the Bureau continued to develop water and land resources.
An investment of about $200 million was added to the Bureau's $3.3 billion plant investment in western projects through completion of dams, powerplants, irrigation canals, pumping plants, electrical transmission lines, and other wealthcreating facilities.
Construction completed during the year added more than 219,000 acre-feet of storage capacity in new Reclamation project reservoirs, 16,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity, 159 miles of canals and related water conveyance and distribution structures, and more than 200 miles of high voltage backbone transmission lines.
The 155 Reclamation reservoirs capable of storing 87.7 million acrefeet of water in 1960 provided full or supplemental water supplies not only for the irrigation of arid lands and for generation of hydroelectric power, but also for use by rapidly growing municipalities and expanding industries, and for public recreation, fish and wildlife conservation, as well as storage space for flood control and salinity control.
Four new projects—Little Wood River, Idaho; Solano, Calif.
Santa Maria, Calif.
Another—Michaud Flats, Idaho—was substantially completed.
The irrigable area for service on the 83 operating irrigation projects in 1959 totaled 8,094,383 acres, comprising 129,000 farms.
The acreage actually irrigated was 6,798,751 acres.
Municipal and industrial water deliveries reached a total of 290 billion gallons, an increase of 13 percent over the previous year.
More than 200 municipalities and other nonfarm entities, with a population of 8.1 million persons, benefited from this service.
Recreational usage of storage reservoirs and other water areas amounted to, an estimated 22.7 million visitor-days, an increase of 16 percent in 1 year.
The 129,000 farms on Reclamation projects in 1959 produced crops valued at more than $1 billion.
This 54th harvest, $129 million greater .
The Bureau's activities in planning, developing, and operating Federal irrigation projects have been greatly facilitated through cooperation with other agencies or organizations.
The special skills, experience and equipment of these public agencies have been fully utilized whenever it was to the advantage of the Government.
Recognizing that the development of water resources in other countries is often a prerequsite to economic progress in those countries, the Bureau—at the request of the Department of State—entered into an agreement with the International Cooperation Administration to assist the Government of Afghanistan in bringing its Helmand Valley project to a more satisfactory level of operating efficiency.
The Bureau also continued its established program of investigations in the Blue Nile River Basin of Ethiopia, and extensive “good neighbor" activities in support of the U.S. Government's technical aid program consisting of providing on-the-job training for foreign engineers and technicians at Bureau facilities.
Reclamation specialists also were assigned for short details to various countries on specific problems.
Funds to cover costs of such programs are provided by the agency requesting the service.
The Bureau participated in publication of two books of major interest to the West during the fiscal year.
They were Design of Small Dams, a 611-page technical reference book published by the Bureau, and Irrigation on Western Farms, written and published jointly by the Bureau and the Soil Conservation Service, Department of Agriculture.
A special Bureau report, "Future Needs for Reclamation in the Western States," was published by the Select Senate Committee on National Water Resources as its Committee Print 14, and attracted widespread attention.
More than 400 separate contracts for construetion and equipment, materials, and supplies were awarded in fiscal year 1960 with a total value of about $89 million.
Of this total amount, construction contracts accounted for about $73 million, or about 85 percent.
A total of 203 construction contracts having a value of more than $49 million were completed during the year.
The 160 construction contracts in force at the end of the year had a total value of about $371 million.
In addition to contracts awarded for construction purposes, procurement of miscellaneous equipment, supplies, and services totaled approximately $19 million, for a total procurement program for the year of about $108 million.
Notable events during the fiscal year included the placing of the first bucket of concrete in Glen Canyon Dam on the Colorado River Storage project in Arizona, and the diversion of the Green River at the Flaming Gorge Dam, also on the Colorado River Storage project, in Utah, thus clearing the damsite for foundation and keyway excavation.
More than 24 million cubic yards of the 33-million cubic yard earthfill Trinity Dam, on the Central Valley project in California, were in place by year's end.
By the end of the fiscal year, about onehalf of the 26-million cubic yard earthfill Navajo Dam, feature of the Colorado River Storage project in New Mexico, had been placed.
Other major events of the fiscal year included the placing in operation of the 16,000-kilowatt Green Springs powerplant on the Rogue River Basin project in Oregon and the completion of Vega Dam on the Collbran project in western Colorado and the Fort Cobb Dam in western Oklahoma.
A highlight of the year was the dedication in October 1959 of the Power System Operations Office Building at Watertown, S. Dak., a feature of the Transmission Division of the Missouri River Basin project.
The operations office is the “nerve center" of the entire eastern division of the Federal power system in the Missouri River Basin.
The office controls the transmission of the power from 5 powerplants over 3,700 miles of transmission lines, through more than 80 Federal substations, to 125 wholesale customers in an area of more than 270,000 square miles in Montana, North and South Dakota, Nebraska, Minnesota, and Iowa.
The year will also be remembered for the celebration of the Golden Jubilee of the Lower Yellowstone project in Montana and North Dakota—50 years of progress on the project since the first water for irrigation was made available in 1909.
Other important events included the completion of Keene Creek Dam on the Rogue River Basin project in Oregon, the enlargement of the Little Wood River Dam on the Little Wood River project in Idaho, and the Southside Tunnel on the Collbran project in Colorado.
Start of construction on four major earthfill dams was made during the year—Prosser Creek Dam on the Washoe project, California-Nevada; Twin Buttes Dam on the San Angelo project in Texas, Gray Reef Dam on the Glendo Unit of the Missouri River Basin project in Wyoming, and Sherman Dam on the Farwell Unit of the Missouri River Basin project in Nebraska.
A major contract was awarded for construction of the Red Willow Dam, an earthfill feature of the Frenchman-Cambridge Division of the Missouri River Basin project in Nebraska.
Irrigation facilities on the Columbia Basin project in Washington were completed to serve an additional 25,000 acres, bringing the total to 411,000 acres.
Also completed were the enlargement of two reaches of the Potholes East Canal, the Sand Hollow Pumping Plant for the Royal Branch Canal lateral system in Block 83, the Royal Branch Canal lateral system in Block 82, the second section of the Wahluke Branch Canal, the Block 201 lateral system, and the White Bluffs Pumping Plant No. 2.
In Oregon, in addition to completion of the 16,000-kilowatt Green Springs Powerplant, construction progress was noted by completion of the earthfill Keene Creek Dam, Green Springs Power Conduit, and the Ashland Lateral and Phoenix Canal Diversion Dams.
Also completed on the project were the second section of the Howard Prairie Delivery Canal, the Green Springs and Cascade Divide Tunnels, and a part of the South Fork Collection Canal system.
Another section of the South Fork Collection Canal system was about two-thirds completed.
Enlargement of Emigrant Dam was about two-thirds completed by the end of June 1960.
Construction of the earthfill Wasco Dam on the Wapinitia project in Oregon was completed.
Construction of the earthfill Prineville Dam on the Crooked River project was virtually completed by the end of the fiscal year.
Also completed was the enlargement of the Little Wood River Dam, an earthfill structure on the Little Wood River project in Idaho.
More than 24 million cubic yards of the 33-million cubic-yard embankment for Trinity Dam were placed.
The dam, the world's highest earthfill dam, on the Trinity River Division of the CentralValley project in California, is to be 537 feet high.
The contract for construction of the dam was 87 percent completed, well ahead of schedule, by year's end.
Clearing of 9,800 acres of the reservoir was essentially completed, and clearing of another 5,600 acres was about 50 percent completed.
The contract for excavation and concrete lining of the 10.8-mile, 17.5-foot-diameter Clear Creek Tunnel, was about 78 percent completed at the end of June 1960, in 70 percent of the contract time.
On June 30, less than 1,000 feet separated the headings in the tunnel, second largest tunnel on a Reclamation project; hole-through was achieved early in August 1960.
Other construction on the Central Valley project included construction of pumping plants and pipeline lateral system for the Tea Pot Dome Water District of the Friant-Kern Canal distribution system, which was started in January 1960, and was about 35 percent completed by the end of the fiscal year.
Construction of the Corning Canal Pumping Plant was about 80 percent completed.
Installation of new armature windings for two generating units of the Shasta Powerplant was completed in April 1960, and the units were returned to service.
Also on the Central Valley project, near the end of the fiscal year, contracts were awarded for the 21½-mile-long Spring Cręek Tunnel and siphon and for Trinity and Clear Creek powerplants.
Initial power generation is scheduled for February 1963.
Specifications for Whiskeytown Dam were issued.
Solano and Ventura River projects are virtually complete and both have been transferred to operation and maintenance status.
A part of the Solano project and all of Ventura River project are being operated by the water users.
Construction of the San Luis unit as an integral part of the Central Valley project was authorized by Public Law 86-488.
This addition will ultimately serve an additional 458,460 acres with irrigation water.
A joint-use agreement with respect to construction and operation is being developed with the State of California.
A new start of the fiscal year was the beginning of construction of the Prosser Creek Dam on the Washoe project, near the California-Nevada State line.
The earthfill dam will be 157 feet high and have a volume of 1,738,600 cubic yards.
Hoover Dam passed its 25th anniversary.
Cantaloupes grown on the Yuma Project—oldest Reclamation development on the lower Colorado River—are a favorite delicacy on dinner tables throughout the Nation, and project farmers in 1959 produced cantaloupes on nearly 13,000 acres of land valued at over $6 million.
River flood waters.
This storage has irrigated up to three-fourths million acres of farmland in California and Arizona each year—producing a cumulative crop value of $2.25 billion.
Since the first generator went on the line in 1936, Hoover hydroelectric units have delivered 98 billion kilowatt-hours of energy with a gross revenue of $182.5 million.
Installation of the 17th and final generating unit—N-8—for the State of Nevada in the Hoover powerplant got underway following earlier awarding of major contracts for its manufacture.
Rated at 95,000 kilowatts and raising the Hoover powerplant's rated capacity to 1,344,800 kilowatts, N–8 is scheduled to go on the line in the Fall of 1961—approximately 25 years after the first Hoover generator began operation.
The total fiscal year 1960 output by Hoover, Davis, and Parker Dams on the Lower Colorado River of 5.25 billion kilowatt-hours represented 12% percent of all electrical energy consumed in the Pacific Southwest.
Reclamation's hydraulic cutter dredge completed a 19.2-mile stretch of new channel on the Colorado River between Needles, Calif., and Big Bend, below Davis Dam.
The dredge cut about 5 miles of new channel and removed about 5.25 million cubic yards of riverbed material during the year.
Some 31.5 miles of new channel have been completed in the Needles stretch of the river since the dredge began operations there early in 1949.
Sheep Creek barrier dam in the Paria River basin was completed.
The structure will reduce silt inflow to the Colorado River below Glen Canyon Dam.
Major contracts were awarded for 61% miles of main conveyance channel and the 10-mile Snyder Ranch conveyance channel on the Wellton-Mohawk division of the Gila project, Arizona.
This work is part of the drainage program for the Wellton-Mohawk Irrigation and Drainage Distriet under a $14-million amendatory repayment contract, which is the largest single drainage contract in reclamation's history.
Rehabilitation and betterment work on the Salt River project in central Arizona continued at the rate of $1 million per year.
The Bureau has contracted with the Salt River Valley Water Users' Association for $16 million of this work.
Approximately $9.5 million has been expended as of June 30, 1960.
The city of Yuma, Ariz., was assured an annual water supply from the Colorado River of 50,000 acre-feet under a contract executed with the Department of the Interior.
A major highlight of the year was the placement on June 17, 1960, of the first bucket of concrete in the Glen Canyon Dam, principal feature of the Colorado River storage project on the Colorado River in northern Arizona.
December 22, 1959, halted all construction at Glen Canyon damsite, the prime contractor was able to complete keyway and foundation excavation and construction of the aggregate, refrigeration, and batch plants so that regular concrete placement could begin in June 1960.
When completed, the 710-foot high concrete arch structure will have a volume of about 5 million cubic yards.
Work under the contract for the dam and the 900,000-kilowatt Glen Canyon powerplant was about 35 percent completed.
Construction of the storage project's 490-foot high concrete arch Flaming Gorge Dam on the Green River in northeastern Utah, was about 30 percent completed by the end of the fiscal year.
The flow of the Green River at the damsite was diverted through the diversion tunnel in November 1959, thus clearing the damsite for foundation and keyway excavation.
By June 1960, foundation excavation in the river channel neared completion.
The contractor continued erection of his concrete batch plant, aggregate plant, and overhead cableways for start of concrete placement in fiscal year 1961.
Construction of the earthfill Stanaker Dam on the Central Utah project, a participating project of the Colorado River storage project in Utah, was about 50 percent completed.
All concrete work was essentially completed and approximately half of the 1,945,000-cubicyard embankment was in place.
On the Weber Basin project, also in Utah, construction of 3 trunklines and 4 pumping plants to distribute water from the Davis Aqueduct was completed, as was also construction of the Bountiful Subdistrict Lateral System.
The Ricks Creek Lateral System and part 1 of the Woods Cross lateral system were virtually completed.
Construction of the first stage of the earthfill Willard Dam was completed, and work on the second stage was about one-third completed.
In western Colorado, on the Collbran project, the 150-foot high, 926,000-cubic-yard earthfill Vega Dam was completed.
Also completed was the half-mile long Southside Tunnel.
Construction of the first 21-mile section of the Southside Canal and the remaining 11.6-mile section of the canal was about 30 percent completed.
Construction continued on the 8,640-kilowatt Upper Molina powerplant and on the 4,860-kilowatt Lower Molina powerplant, as well as on the 5.6-mile long Bonham pipeline and the 5.5-mile long Cottonwood pipeline.
Late in the fiscal year, construction began on the Leon and Park Creek Feeder Canal System.
At Paonia Dam, on the Paonia project, also in western Colorado, work during the year proceeded on the completion of the highway relocation, excavation for the spillway, placing concrete lining in the outlet works tunnel, and construction of the stilling basin preparatory to diverting Muddy Creek.
The flow of Muddy Creek was diverted through the completed tunnel and stilling basin during May 1960.
Following diversion, excavation for the dam foundation was completed.
Placement of the 210-foot high, 1,266,000-cubic yard earthfill embankment was scheduled to begin early in fiscal year 1961.
At Navajo Dam in northwestern New Mexico, the flow of the San Juan River was diverted through the outlet works in January 1960.
By the end of the fiscal year, approximately one-half of the 26-million cubic vard earthfill embankment had been placed.
The entire work on construction of the 408-foot-high dam, principal feature of the Navajo unit of the Colorado River storage project, was approximately 60 percent completed in 42 percent of the contract time.
The first construction contract on the Hammond project (New Mexico) was awarded in June 1960.
The start of actual construction on the Seedskadee project (Wyoming) was delayed by the problems associated with the discovery of valuable trona deposits underlying a large portion of the project area.
Construction of the Eden project (Wyoming) was completed.
On the Weber Basin project (Utah), the second phase of Willard Dam was started, and work was continued and/or completed on a number of lateral systems to distribute water from the Davis and Weber agueducts.
Particularly significant was the payment of the first construction installment of $198,873 on the Weber Basin project under the terms of the repayment contract with the Weber Basin Water Conservancy District.
The most significant construction activity was the award of the prime contract for Twin Buttes Dam and the beginning of construction of the San Angelo project.
The principal use of the 134-foothigh, earthfill dam and reservoir will be for a municipal and industrial water supply for the city of San Angelo, Tex.
Ground-breaking ceremonies were held at the damsite on June 22.
Fort Cobb Dam on the Washita Basin project, Okla., was completed and the aqueduct system for municipal and industrial water for several Oklahoma cities was nearing completion.
Construction of the Foss Dam, a 10,567,000-cubic-yard earthfill dam, was ahead of schedule and contract was awarded for construction of a 50-mile aqueduct system for municipal and industrial water supplies for several Oklahoma cities.
Planned recreational facilities around Fort Cobb dam and reservoir were practically completed.
Enough bydroelectric energy to supply five cities the size of Minneapolis, Minn., routed over 3,700 miles of transmission line for distribution over a 270,000 square mile area—that is the weekly, daily, bourly job of the dispatchers pictured at the console of the instrument board in the main system dispatchers office, Watertown, S. Dak.
Texas-New Mexico—and continued satisfactorily on several divisions of the Lower Rio Grande project, Tex.
A joint program with the Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation for channelizing of the Rio Grande above the Elephant Butte Reservoir continued during the year.
This work involves straightening the channel, providing floodways, and placement of protective features, all of which are designed to improve control of the river, protect irrigation project features and lands through which the river flows.
Construction of the Norman project, Okla., was authorized by Publie Law 86–529.
This project when construeted will provide needed domestic water for three Oklahoma communities and an important air base and will contribute substantial flood control and fish and wildlife benefits.
In Wyoming, construction of the structure for the 48,000-kilowatt Fremont Canyon powerplant was completed, and lining of the 3-mile long, 18-foot diameter power conduit was completed.
Also in Wyoming, more than 60,000 cubic yards of the conerete was placed in the 203-foot high, 66,000-cubic yard Anchor Dam, Owl Creek unit, Missouri River Basin project.
By the end of June 1960, the concrete was only about 17 feet below the final crest height.
All mass concrete is expected to be in place early in fiscal year 1961.
On the Glendo unit of the Missouri River basin project, construction of Gray Reef Dam was started.
This will be an earthfill structure on the North Platte River, and will be 36 feet high and have a volume of 49,000 cubic yards.
A new irrigation start was the 50,000-acre East Bench unit in Montana.
Laterals, drains, and canal lining on the Helena Valley unit, and rehabilitation of Sherburne Lake Dam of the Milk River project, Mont.
Another new start was Sherman Dam on the Farwell unit of the Missouri River basin project in Nebraska.
The earthfill dam will be 97 feet high and have a volume of 1,700,000 cubic yards.
About 300,000 cubic yards of embankment was placed by the end of the fiscal year.
On the Frenchman-Cambridge division of the Missouri River basin project in Nebraska, reconstruction of the old Culbertson Canal was continued; reconstruction of the last section of the old canal was about 90 percent completed when work was halted, until after the close of the 1960 irrigation season.
Construction of the new Culbertson Extension Canal under two contracts was in progress during the year.
Work on the Bostwick division of the basin project in Kansas was noted by the completion of the 5.5-mile-long White Rock Canal.
Work was started on the 8.6-mile-long White Rock Extension Canal and 6.9 miles of laterals.
Also in Kansas, on the Kirwin unit, the 13.9-mile-long third section of the Osborne Canal and 17 miles of laterals were completed, and work was started on the 10.5-mile-long fourth section of the canal and 12.8 miles of laterals and drains.
The Bureau continued to maintain its safety program for the prevention of accidents associated with the hazards of heavy construction work.
Efforts were directed toward prevention of injuries and loss of life by eliminating the physical and personal causes of accidents.
The overall accident frequency rate was 10 percent below the national average for heavy construction, despite the fact that hazardous tunnel work on Reclamation projects accounted for 11 percent of the total man-hours worked.
Competition from European manufacturers under invitations for equipment issued by the Bureau of Reclamation increased over that of the past 2 years.
Twenty-three contracts were awarded to companies offering foreign-manufactured equipment, including 9 Italian, 4 West German, 4 Swiss, 3 Austrian, 2 English, and 1 French.
Sixteen of these contracts were for electrical equipment.
The remaining seven contracts were for gates, valves, pumping units, a crane, and a hoist, indicating increasing interest in such equipment by foreign manufacturers.
As the farmlands develop on the project, a great many processing plants are built to bandle the produce from irrigated lands.
These peas have just been shelled and will be packaged and frozen.
The following tabulation shows a comparison of contracts awarded for foreign equipment during the past 5 fiscal years.
Bids were received for the first time from companies offering equipment manufactured in Japan.
Bids were received from Japanese manufacturers for the Glen Canyon, Flaming Gorge, and Trinity powerplant turbines.
Citrus, a Reclamation bealth food crop.
Nearly 300,000 acres of reclamation project lands are utilized for production of apples, peaches, grapes, citrus and other fruits.
Citrus acreage has tripled in 30 years.
Grande, Belen Area unit 2, Middle Rio Grande project, N. Mex., was awarded on the basis that foreign steel would be used in the jetty units.
In accordance with regulations, a differential was added to foreign bids for comparison with domestic bids.
Construction costs on Bureau of Reclamation projects decreased about 2 percent during fiscal year 1960.
For the same period, construction wage rates increased about 5 percent, while most construction material costs remained fairly stable.
Bidding interest in reclamation construction work remained high; an average of 7.4 bids was received on each construction schedule advertised.
The average low bid was 16 percent below the engineers' estimate.
Table 1 of the appendix lists major construction and supply contracts (more than $1,00,000 each) awarded by the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1960.
West's livestock winters and fattens in irrigated stream valleys.
More than 70 percent of reclamation project lands are utilized for grain and forage for livestock operations.
Principal features completed on Bureau of Reclamation projects in fiscal year 1960 are shown in table 2 of the appendix.
The list includes 5 storage dams, 2 diversion dams and 159 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals, and drains, as well as 202 miles of transmission lines.
The value of all crops on all Bureau of Reclamation projects averaged $164 per acre in 1959.
The highest project average was $819.
Celery topped all crops with an average per-acre value of $1,928.
Details of this agricultural production are provided in tables 3 and 4.
The utilization of over 70 percent of the irrigated lands for the production of 18.4 million tons of forage and grain is indicative of the importance of livestock operations on reclamation farms.
Favorable trends are evident in the productivity and utilization of the reclamation areas.
Crop yields progressively push ahead.
Intensification is evident in increasing proportions of vegetables and fruit acreages.
Reclamation complements the Nation's agricultural plant in producing the fruits, vegetables, livestock, and livestock products— the protective, body-building foods rich in protein, vitamin A and the three B vitamins, needed for adequate diets of many of our people.
Nearly 10 billion pounds of vegetable crops were produced by reclamation farmers in 1959.
Vegetable cropping used only 8 percent of the irrigated land but produced one-fifth of the crop value.
Much of this production is for the fresh vegetable market of late fall, winter, and early spring when only limited production is available from nonirrigated areas.
The market value of these crops does not fully represent their true value in terms of benefits of balanced and attractive year-round diets.
In order to utilize to the greatest advantage the water supplies made available by multipurpose reservoirs, the Bureau of Reclamation in its program of aiding in the developing of America's water resources has constructed and, as of June 30, 1960, is operating 41 powerplants with an installed nameplate capacity of 5,151,550 kilowatts.
In addition, the Bureau is responsible for marketing the power generated at four powerplants constructed by the Corps of Engineers with a total installed nameplate capacity of 745,035 kilowatts and one powerplant installed by the International Boundary and Water Commission, with a total nameplate capacity of 31,500 kilowatts.
Sale of electric power by the Bureau during the year aggregated 26,840,676,301 kilowatt-hours, with revenues from sales totaling $68,754,385.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1960, the installed nameplate capacity of hydroelectric powerplants at Bureau of Reclamation multipurpose projects and at projects for which the Bureau is responsible for marketing the power was increased 16,000 kilowatts.
Also the Old Eklutna hydroelectric powerplant in Alaska with a nameplate capacity of 2,000 kilowatts was sold during this period.
This resulted in a net increase of 14,000 kilowatts in installed nameplate capacity over the fiscal year 1959 figures.
At the end of fiscal year 1960, the Bureau of Reclamation had under construction 8 powerplants, which will have an ultimate installed nameplate capacity of 1,453,500 kilowatts.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers is proceeding with the construction of its Big Bend and Oahe plants in the Missouri River basin project.
The ultimate installed nameplate capacity of the Big Bend and Oahe powerplants in South Dakota will be 468,000 kilowatts and 595,000 kilowatts, respectively.
The Corps is also installing 2 additional generating units each in its Fort Peck and Garrison powerplants, thereby increasing the capacities of these plants by 80,000 kilowatts and 160,000 kilowatts, respectively.
The Bureau of Reclamation will be the marketing agent for energy generated from these plants as in the case for other plants constructed by the Corps on the Missouri River basin project.
To provide the electrical energy for the Bureau's projects and to market the power which is surplus to the Bureau's needs, a transmission system including powerplant substations, switchyards, and transmission lines, has been constructed.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1960, approximately 202 circuit miles of transmission lines were completed resulting in a total system of 10,151 circuit miles of line.
As of June 30, 1960, the installed transformer capacity of the individual substations operated by the Bureau was 11,535,218 kva.
Important progress was made on the backbone transmission system for the Colorado River storage project.
Extensive discussions with both the private power utilities and the preference power-user groups, regarding plans for transmission lines to interconnect the storage unit dams and to serve the anticipated market area, culminated in the announcement of the proposed Colorado River storage project power marketing area and eriteria by the Secretary of the Interior on May 18, 1960.
Erection of steel towers for the 105-mile-long steel tower Fort Peck-Dawson County section of the 310-mile-long, 230-kilovolt transmission line, which extends from Fort Peck powerplant in Montana to Bismarck, N. Dak., was completed.
Construction of footings and erection of steel towers for the 205-mile-long Dawson County-Bismarck section were essentially completed by June 1960.
Stringing of conductors and overhead ground wire for the 310-mile line was to begin early in fiscal year 1961.
The line, which includes both the Fort Peck project and the transmission division of the Missouri River basin project, is expected to be ready for service in January 1961.
Also completed was the 165-mile, 230-kilovolt steel tower transmission line between Fargo, N. Dak., and Granite Falls, Minn.
In Wyoming, the 37-mile-long, 115-kilovolt Boysen-Pilot Butte transmission line was completed.
Under construction during the year was the 100-mile-long, 230-kilovolt Bismarck-Jamestown transmission line No. 2 and the 84-mile-long, 230-kilovolt Jamestown-Fargo transmission line No. 2, both in North Dakota.
In Wyoming, construction of the 140-milelong, 115-kilovolt Kortes-Cheyenne transmission line was about 75 percent completed.
During fiscal year 1960 there were 144 contracts executed for the sale of power, for transmission service or for other purposes.
A number of the contracts executed were renewals of operating contracts or revisions of existing contracts resulting from a change in operating conditions.
The Bureau continued its policy of contracting whenever possible with private utilities, public bodies and cooperatives for wheeling power and energy over existing facilities.
The Bureau also entered into several interchange agreements with its customers.
The Bureau at the end of fiseal year 1960 had 43 contracts under active negotiation.
In this number are included 12 contracts with private utilities, 11 with REA cooperatives, 11 with municipalities, 3 with Federal agencies, 5 with State agencies, and 1 with an irrigation district.
A number of these are to renew the existing contracts or to revise contracts in existence due to changes in operating conditions.
The recently approved allocations for the Central Valley project and the eastern division of the Missouri River basin project will require the preparation of new contracts or supplements to existing contracts with the allottees.
During the year the Bureau, in cooperation with other agencies, was engaged in comprehensive surveys in 14 river basins throughout the West, including three subbasins of the Missouri River basin.
Miscellaneous general studies were essentially completed in several of these basins and subbasins such as the Kootenai River basin in Montana, the Lower Klamath River and adjacent basins in California and Oregon, and the Pecos River basin in New Mexico and Texas.
Studies were also essentially completed on the Bighorn basin division in Wyoming and the South Platte River basin in Colorado, Wyoming and Nebraska—subbasins of the Missouri River basin.
The Dalles project in Oregon; the Garrison diversion unit, Missouri River basin project in North Dakota; the Pine River project extension in Colorado; and Ruedi dam and reservoir, Fryingpan-Arkansas project in Colorado.
Planning reports on Agate dam and reservoir, Rouge River basin project, Oreg.
In addition, the planning report on the Oroville-Tonasket unit, Chief Joseph Dam project, Wash., was transmitted to and was under review at the end of the year by the Bureau of the Budget, to determine its position in relation to the President's program prior to submission to the Congress.
During the fiscal year definite plans for authorized projects were completed on the Florida project, Colo., a participating project of the Colorado River storage project; the Greater Wenatchee division of the Chief Joseph Dam project, Wash.
The Central Utah Projects Office was established at Provo, Utah, to handle the accelerated planning program for the Central Utah project—the largest participating project of the Colorado River Storage project.
Review has been completed by interested Federal agencies and Alaska on the planning report for the Crater-Long Lakes division of the Snettisham project.
Arkansas River (Arkansas and Oklahoma).
Arkansas River (Kansas and Oklahoma).
Cheyenne River (Wyoming and South Dakota).
Columbia River (Idaho-Montana-Nevada-Oregon-Utah-Washington-Wyoming).
Little Missouri River (Wyoming-Montana-North Dakota).
Red River (Arkansas-Louisiana-Oklahoma-Texas).
Truckee-Carson-Walker Rivers and Lake Tahoe (California-Nevada).
The Bureau of Reclamation is represented on two International Engineering Boards of the International Joint Commission.
Under the reference of January 12, 1948, the Souris-Red Rivers Engineering Board through interested Federal agencies continued the systematic collection and study of hydrologic data and related flood control and irrigation investigations in the Souris, Red, and Missouri River basins.
Appropriations made available to the Bureau of Reclamation for fiscal year 1960, exelusive of permanent appropriations, totaled $256,- 271,250.
This amount includes $5,903,000 appropriated in two supplemental appropriation acts.
Appropriations for 1960 were $9,543,285 less than was made available for fiscal year 1959.
This reduction was due primarily to the substantial completion in 1959 of the Ventura and Solano projects.
Contracts for repayment of an appropriate share of the reimbursable costs of a reclamation project are normally prerequisite to the initiation of construction.
During fiscal year 1960, more than 40 contracts were executed for repayment, under reclamation law, of Federal costs associated with water resource projects.
The repayment contracts for the Black Butte and New Hogan projects in California achieved two significant firsts.
The contracts, executed March 2, 1960, were the first to be negotiated by the Department of the Interior for repayment, under reclamation law, of irrigation costs of a project to be constructed and operated by the Corps of Engineers.
They were negotiated at the request of the Department of the Army following an opinion by the Attorney General that Federal reclamation law applied.
The New Hogan and Black Butte contracts are also unusual in that the State of California has assumed the responsibility for the repayment of reimbursable project costs.
This unique Federal-State contract arrangement is without precedent and was possible because the State legislature had previously appropriated $13,740,000 for these purposes.
The State serves as a guarantor while the United States is negotiating contracts with water user organizations.
As these contracts are negotiated, the State's obligation will be correspondingly reduced.
Beginning with the eighth full calendar vear after a project is available for the storage or delivery of water, the State has the right to market the remaining project water supplies.
The cost of the Black Butte project is estimated at $18 million, of which 39.9 percent is assigned to irrigation.
New Hogan project is estimated to cost $17,600,000, with 36.2 percent assigned to irrigation.
The total value of all repayment contracts on June 30, 1960, amounted to $954,674,498.
Of this amount, a total of $147,926,002 has been repaid and delinquencies were insignificant.
In addition, over $125 million will be returned to the Government in water service payments under contracts now in force.
There was considerable contract activity in the loan programs during the fiscal year.
Congress appropriated $4,062,575 for the first year requirements on five projects under the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956 having loans totaling $11,045,000.
Construction was initiated on four of these during the year and on one that received funds in the previous year.
Seven other small project applications were approved and forwarded to the Congress.
One more was approved by the Secretary but had not yet been forwarded to Congress by June 30.
These last eight approved applications represent loans totaling $25,569,000.
Good progress is being made by the four local organizations that started construction in fiscal year 1959 and two of the projects are nearing completion.
At the end of the year all applications received had been acted upon within the Department.
Congress appropriated $7,017,000 for two distribution system loans under Public Law 130, 83d Congress.
Both local organizations started construction activities before the end of the year.
One of the two distribution systems started earlier was completed and fairly good progress is being made on construction of the other.
Cooperative work is implemented by means of agreements between the Bureau and the other òrganizations involved in conservation which now include several agencies within the Department of Agriculture and the State colleges and extension services of the 17 western States and the State of Alaska, as well as many other Federal, State, and local organizations.
During fiscal year 1960 there were 346 such cooperative agreements in effect.
They include studies and investigations conducted on development farms, conservation, and efficient use of soil and water, crop and cropping problems, assistance to county agricultural agents, and weed-control studies.
They cover also the development and management of reservoir recreational and wildlife areas, and assistance in solving many other problems pertaining to the development and operation of irrigation projects.
Cooperative work also included participation by Bureau representatives on the Interdepartmental Committee on Pest Control, and on the special work group to develop interagency coordination of plans for emergency water resource management for civil defense and defense mobilization.
One of the principal functions of the Bureau of Reclamation is the efficient application of water to land without waste or erosion.
The Bureau encourages agricultural agencies and cooperates with them in research and conducts research directed toward water-saving methods of irrigation, evaporation control, transpiration losses, and seepage control including canal linings.
The Bureau is interested also in soil and moisture conservation on the lands under its jurisdiction such as those surrounding reservoirs or other areas withdrawn or acquired for reclamation purposes.
These operations are directed toward the protection of reclamationbuilt structures and works from the adverse effects of soil erosion.
The work undertaken includes reseeding watershed areas, structural installations, and other means of erosion control stabilization; vegetation control and pest control measures; sand dune control; and installations for the protection of irrigation facilities.
The program objectives are accomplished in cooperation with other Federal agencies, as well as State and local agencies.
Water users' organizations also assist in planning the work and in many cases furnish a part of the labor, materials, and funds.
Development farms have proved to be an important part of the settlement program on new areas being developed for irrigation.
The Bureau's field scale demonstrations and the research conducted by cooperating agricultural agencies on these farms furnish much valuable information for the use of the new settlers, and remove many of the factors which caused hardships and often failures of settlers on earlier developed projects.
They also aid in the conservation of soil and water through promoting more efficient use of these important natural resources.
This phase of conservation is especially important in view of our increasing population and the decreasing areas suitable for irrigation development.
Development farms are established as far as possible in advance of settlement, usually 2 to 5 years, in order that much of the necessary experience and information will have been obtained when the new settlers arrive.
The farms are located in areas which best represent the soils and other conditions of the new project.
The sites are chosen and the plans for the development and operation of each farm are formulated in cooperation with agricultural and other interested agencies.
The major portion of each farm is devoted to field scale demonstrations of approved farm irrigation systems, irrigation methods, kinds and varieties of adapted crops, cultural practices, weed control, farm drainage, and solutions to other problems with which new irrigation farmers are faced.
From 10 to 25 percent of the area of most of the farms is set aside for research, which is conducted by State college experiment stations and cooperating agricultural agencies such as the Agricultural Research Administration and the Soil Conservation Service.
The research may include investigations regarding fertilizer requirements, handling of problem soils, water requirements, plant diseases, insect pests, and other problems peculiar to a particular area.
After methods have been developed from the research and thoroughly tested they also are demonstrated on the farms.
Some of the farms have served the additional purpose of aiding in determining the feasibility of projects.
The farms which are not operated by the owners are leased to carefully selected experienced farmers as soon as the land is cleared and leveled and the necessary buildings have been constructed.
This method of operation has resulted in the farms becoming self-supporting.
There were 10 development farms in operation during fiscal year 1960 and 18 farms previously operated have been discontinued because they have served their purpose.
The existing farms are located in the Wellton-Mohawk division of the Gila project, Ariz., and in several units of the Missouri River basin project in regions 6 and 7.
Additional farms are proposed for new areas scheduled for development.
The Bureau of Reclamation and other agencies responsible for the development farms work closely with the State college extension services to be certain that the information from research findings and demonstrations is properly disseminated to the new settlers.
Hundreds of farmers attend the annual field days and tours at which representatives of the Bureau and the cooperating agencies explain the work in detail.
The settlers are encouraged to visit the farms at any time during the year to obtain information.
Pamphlets are prepared and distributed which supply data on the crops raised, yields, and other pertinent information.
In addition to project farmers the development farms benefit college and high school students who visit the farms with their instructors.
The Bureau conducted two land openings on the Columbia basin project, Washington State, making available for settlement a total of 39 farm units.
Since the close of World War II, a total of 2,816 farm units, consisting of 271,108 irriagable acres, have been made available for settlement, either by homesteading or by purchase.
Settlers do not pay for the public land which is opened to homesteading.
Government-acquired lands are sold to settlers as farm units.
In either case, settlers pay to the Federal Government, through an irrigation distriet, or other recognized water-users' organization, the pro rata share of the construction costs of irrigation facilities built to supply the land with water.
They also pay an annual charge for operation and maintenance of the irrigation works.
The construction costs are paid without interest over a long period, usually 40 or 50 years.
The Boulder City Act of 1958 established conditions for local selfgovernment by the people of Boulder City, Nev., a town developed in construction of Hoover Dam.
The Federal Government transferred to a municipal corporation established under the act, its interest in municipal properties, utilities, and associated facilities.
Concurrently residential and commercial properties, owned by the Federal Government, were sold into private ownership, thus creating a basis for complete assumption of the responsibilities of self-government by the newly created corporate municipality.
Ownership of slightly over 21,600 acres of land valued at $2,393,900 was transferred from the United States to the municipality.
Through the sale of federally owned residences in the city, properties having a total appraised value of $1,224,800 were added to the tax rolls.
Municipal electric, water, and sewerage systems, municipal buildings, streets and associated public use areas, together with related equipment and property representing a value of approximately $2,500,000 were also turned over to the municipality.
School buildings in Boulder City, representing a total investment of $1,552,554 were transferred to the Clark County School District.
The Bureau is completing the subdivision of that portion of Boulder City known as Lakeview Addition, pursuant to provisions of the Boulder City Act of 1958.
On completion of this work, this last remaining area will be transferred to the municipality.
In connection with construction of the Colorado River storage project, Glen Canyon unit, Ariz., it was deemed necessary to establish a townsite at Glen Canyon damsite in order to provide necessary housing, municipal services and attendant benefits for the construction force employed there.
The resultant town of Page, Ariz., is well on its way toward becoming a full fledged municipality.
Subdivision has been accomplished, streets have been paved, and public utilities made available throughout the central area.
Permanent commercial establishments are now being constructed by a variety of private operators who have taken advantage of the sale of commercial and residential lots to acquire the property necessary for such purposes.
It is currently anticipated that the community will continue to grow during the remainder of the construction period and reach a population of approximately 3,500 inhabitants.
Although municipal administration and management is still retained by the United States, all plans are being made with the objective of facilitating transfer of these functions to an appropriate municipal corporation at the earliest moment.
It is thus hoped that with the conclusion of construction, Page, Ariz., will have become established to a degree that will permit its successful continuation as a tourist and recreational center in association with the nearby major project feature and other scenic attractions of the Southwest.
During the fiscal year, legal action was initiated by the Department of Justice to evict a number of trespassers on reclamation-withdrawn land along the lower Colorado River in Arizona and California.
It was estimated that this illegal use of Federal lands may extend to as much as 27,000 acres.
At the time the legal action was taken the Department announced that a land-use program for the lower river area was under consideration.
The review of maintenance program, initiated in 1948 to protect the Government's investment in constructed irrigation works, now provides for the periodic examination of 677 individual structures or irrigation systems on 101 projects.
Regularly scheduled field reviews of the maintenance programs for major structures and facilities were made during the year.
Also, special examinations were made of specific problems.
The periodic examinations provide assurance of the structural safety of individual features and improved operating efficiency of the systems as a whole.
The 677 structures and facilities now subject to examination under the program include 187 storage dams; 117 diversion dams and headworks; 95 major and important pumping plants; 90 features of special importance to particular projects, such as desilting works, siphons, and tunnels; and 188 carriage, distribution and drainage systems.
Of the 57 additional structures covered under the review of maintenance program for the first time during the past year, 17 storage and 16 diversion dams and several of the more important pumping plants were included.
Improved maintenance and repair of project works can be judged from the fact that the backlog of urgently recommended actions in the early years of the program has been drastically reduced.
There also has been a reduction in the less urgent recommendations.
Some of the reduction can be attributed to several project rehabilitation programs now under way on several of the older projects, such as repair and rehabilitation of Sherburne Lake Dam on the Milk River project, the Buffalo Bill Dam on the Shoshone project, replacement of canal linings on the Salt River and North Platte projects, and the enclosing of many laterals in pipe.
Most encouraging, however, is the major repair and rehabilitation being accomplished by the water users as a part of their general maintenance programs.
It is generally recognized that the Review of Maintenance Program has been a major factor in this general improvement.
To provide for expanding use of our essentially nonexpandable water resources, the Bureau is engaged in programs to make conservation structures more efficient and to develop ways to cut down on water waste that occurs through evaporation, nonbeneficial use by water weeds, and seepage.
A significant achievement during the fiscal year was the development of standard designs for noncylinder prestressed concrete pressure pipe.
The design is expected to be used in the conveyance of water under moderately high pressure and should, under certain hydraulic conditions where this pipe is competitive, produce lower costs for pipelines and conduits for irrigation distribution systems.
A comprehensive review and evaluation of designs of large canals to develop improved methods of determining flow resistance in such canals was initiated during the year.
The work was undertaken as a result of findings on the Central Valley project in California, which indicated that the design procedures which had been used satisfactorily to calculate the capacity of small and medium-sized canals may not be adequate for large canals on flat slopes.
Loss of water through seepage in canals has for many years been of increasing concern to the Bureau of Reclamation and other irrigation interests, especially in the western United States.
Under the Bureau's lower-cost canal lining program, studies were continued to reduce seepage losses from canals and laterals and to prevent the waterlogging of irrigable lands.
New developments under the program included experimental installation of plastics as canal linings, methods of detecting seepage, improvement of water measurement, and evaluation of linings installed.
The studies showed that plastic materials which were formerly too costly can now be obtained at a cost competitive with other materials for use as buried membranes in lining waterways and reservoirs.
Three trial canal lining installations of plastic materials, each about 500 feet in length, were made during the year.
An electrical logging device, containing some features not usually found on electrical well-logging equipment and better adapted to canal logging, was tested and showed considerable promise as a means of detecting seepage from canals and laterals.
The device included self-potential measuring equipment which was used to study waterflow through canal soils by picking up the electrical currents generated by the flow.
A field test was also completed in which seepage losses were traced by tritium, an isotope of hydrogen.
During the fiscal year an electronic computer was installed in the engineering offices of the Bureau at Denver.
The equipment was used to solve a diversity of complex problems requiring high speed computation.
Extensive computations were made to speed determinations of canal and roadway earthwork quantities on many projects.
Considerable savings in time and effort resulted from the use of the computer equipment for this work.
Through the use of the computing equipment, engineers were relieved of making many routine calculations and were able to devote more of their time to professional design work.
Electrical designs were prepared for the Trinity, Clear Creek, and Spring Creek powerplants, to be constructed on the Trinity River division of the Central Valley project.
These powerplants are to be supervisory controlled from the project's existing Keswick powerplant.
The new plants will be attended only for purposes of maintenance, inspection, or for conditions requiring manual operation.
The plants will have pushbutton automatic controls so that the generating units may be automatically started and stopped remotely by supervisory control.
Designs were also prepared for the Glen Canyon powerplant main control board.
This will be a circular board, the first control board of this type to be used by the Bureau.
In structural design, progress was made in the design of the Trinity, Clear Creek, and Spring Creek powerplants, to achieve maximum economy by duplication and similarity insofar as possible, such as equal crane span and erane capacity, equal column spacing, similar arrangement of transformers, similar superstructures having grouted masonry and steel siding, and other similarities in general arrangement.
During the year a program was begun to establish design criteria on the amplitude, frequency, and acceleration of vibrational forces in hydroelectric powerplants.
To supply additional information on the ability of various metals to perform satisfactorily under high-pressure sliding contact, tests were initiated to determine the friction coefficients and bearing values for various combinations of bronze, monel metal, and stainless steel used in high-pressure slide gates.
The data thus obtained were used in specifying improved seating metal for the slide gates at Glen Canyon and Navajo Dams.
Laboratory and field investigations of a monomolecular layer (an invisible chemical film one molecule thick) for reservoir evaporation reduction were continued.
Screening tests were made on various fatty alcohols and other film forming materials.
Monomolecular layer behavior tests were performed at Boulder Basin of Lake Mead at Hoover Dam, and at Lake Sahuaro at Stewart Mountain Dam in Arizona.
The tests indicated that the persistence of a film on large lakes and reservoirs under reasonable wind conditions may be greater than previously anticipated.
A new method by scientists of the Bureau of Reclamation's engineering laboratories at Denver, by which melted material is sprayed from automatic dispensers, was developed for use in reservoir evaporation reduction tests.
The method of film formation and maintenance of the film promises to be much more efficient and economical than methods previously used.
Research investigations in the control of aquatic weeds, being performed in cooperation with the Agricultural Research Service of the Department of Agriculture, included the study of copper-bearing antifouling paints (originally developed to prevent marine organisms from adhering to ship bottoms) for the control of algae growth that tends to reduce the capacity of concrete canals and flumes.
The results of field and laboratory tests indicated that a number of the paints had excellent algaecidal properties.
Increased attention was given to the studies of aquatic weed problems in large canals of the far western States.
Solvent type aquatic herbicides were evaluated for their performance in bioassay tests.
The comprehensive weed control program conducted by the Bureau of Reclamation is continuing to prove very effective in reducing the problems caused by undesirable vegetation and in decreasing operation and maintenance costs.
It also is aiding materially in reducing water losses resulting from transpiration, evaporation, and seepage due to weed growths.
The research program conducted in cooperation with the Bureau by the Department of Agriculture is resulting in the development of more efficient and economical methods of controlling weeds infesting banks and channels of irrigation and drainage systems.
This phase of the program is being accomplished at four field stations in the West, and in the Assistant Commissioner and Chief Engineer's weed control laboratory in Denver.
The cooperative research program in the laboratory has been enlarged and now two Bureau of Reclamation and two Department of Agriculture scientists are devoting full time to this work.
The ditchbank seeding program to prevent and control weed growths and erosion was continued with excellent results.
The educational program which has been so successful in advising project personnel on new and more economical methods for controlling weeds also was continued through the distribution of motion pictures, slide lectures, manuals, special releases on new equipment, and articles in the Reclamation Era.
Work was continued for developing more effective methods for controlling salt cedar (tamarisk) in the Southwest.
Progress was made also in controlling other woody phreatophytes where these plants have invaded irrigation systems, natural water courses, reservoirs, and other areas.
These growths not only usurp millions of acre-feet of water so greatly needed for irrigation, municipal, and industrial purposes, but increase flood hazards and take over lands which should be used for grazing and agriculture.
It is estimated that in the 17 contiguous western States, undesirable phreatophytes infest over 15 million acres and transpire at least 25 million acre-feet of water.
Committees composed of representatives of the Departments of Agriculture and Interior, including the Bureau of Reclamation, are working on this and other weed control problems common to Government agencies.
Much progress has been made in reducing costs and water losses due to weeds on irrigation systems in a comparatively short time through the Bureau's weed control program.
It is estimated that in fiscal 1960 the losses due to weeds on irrigation systems were reduced several million dollars annually as compared to 1948.
However, all weed problems have not been solved as economically as desired.
Therefore, research is being continued as planned to aid in solving this major problem of irrigation systems.
A halogeton control program has been developed in cooperation with other agencies under the provisions of the Halogeton Glomeratus Act (Public Law 529, July 14, 1952) in the interest of increasing the land use value of the lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau and of protecting the livestock.
It is known that this poisonous weed infests Bureau lands in Utah, Nevada, Colorado, Wyoming, and Idaho.
Surveys to locate halogeton infestations were continued as were the cooperative investigations to determine the most effective and economical control methods.
The actual control programs including chemical spraying and grass seedings were continued primarily through agreements with the Department's Bureau of Land Management.
Increased emphasis was given to better instrumentation in hydraulic laboratory studies.
New equipment utilized included a six-channel direct-writing recorder to measure simultaneously, flow, velocity, pressure, acceleration, vibration, temperature, strain, and other physical phenomena at different points on laboratory and field structures and test facilities.
Epoxy resin compounds for bonding fresh mortar to aged mortar and for making epoxy mortars for use in patching spalled concrete, received considerable attention in laboratory studies.
Several compounds were selected for field application.
Epoxy resins were also evaluated in other construction materials, such as protective coatings and joint fillers.
In laboratory tests, certain epoxy compounds were found to be effective in resisting the damage caused by the erosive force of flowing water.
Laboratory studies on the improvement of quality of aggregates for concrete through the method of separating the unsound material were initiated to find additional ways of improving marginal aggregates for use in Bureau concrete structures.
The method involves elastic properties, that is, the rebound characteristics of an aggregate to separate sound, dense particles from less sound particles by the distance of its bounce when it is dropped on a massive, inclined steel plate.
A nuclear instrument for rapidly determining the in-place density and moisture content of soil was evaluated in the laboratories.
The instrument utilized radioisotopes in probes which can be placed on or in the soil.
After study in the laboratories, the instrument was given field trials on two earth dams.
The field test data will be analyzed to determine the accuracy of the instrument and its potential for future use in earthwork control.
A new device was developed to measure the corrosiveness of soils and waters to iron and steel.
The instrument, an electric resistance corrosion meter, was also used to estimate corrosiveness of various other materials and alloys considered for use in highly saline and acidic ground water.
Indicative of increased emphasis on research in protective coatings for metal work was the comprehensive test program initiated during the vear in the 6-foot-diameter siphon piping of the Southside Canal on the Collbran project on the Colorado River.
Among the new coatings placed under test in the siphon piping were the “accelerated" or chemically set materials and metalized zinc and zinc-pigmented coatings.
Comparison of the new coatings side by side with currently specified coatings is designed to indicate which offer significantly greater durability and economy in preventing corrosion of ferrous materials.
Laboratory and field tests during the year disclosed that a sandfilled vinyl resin paint system is an economical and durable replacement for eroded vinyl paint linings in the invert section of steel pipes carrying sand-laden water.
The paint system proved to be one of the best of many evaluated in the laboratory and is suited to new pipe installations as well as to old installations.
During the vear an improved vane-type soil testing apparatus was patented by a Bureau research engineer.
The invention is used to determine the in-place shearing resistance of soils.
A patent application for a Bureau invention covering a method for large-scale application of monomolecular layers of fatty alcohols to water surfaces to reduce evaporation from the surfaces was filed in the Patent Office.
The Bureau's Hydrology Branch continued to study the source of, occurrence of, and use of surface and underground waters where they affect the planning and operation of reclamation projects.
For proposed projects, studies are made to determine the amount and usability of the available water supply, to determine the amounts and distribution of sediment transport loads and depositions, and to determine the design flood conditions.
Studies also were continued to improve the reservoir operational criteria so as to attain optimum benefits from the standpoint of irrigation, flood control, hydropower, recreation, fish and wildlife resources, and sediment control.
Studies were made to analyze changes in channel regime caused by the installation of structures in streams and by the extraction or addition of water to the natural flow pattern of streams.
Cooperative work with the Department's Geological Survey was continued on the measurement of water consumption by salt cedars in the Salt River Valley of Arizona.
Six large lysimeters are being used to measure the water consumption of both beneficial crops and nonbeneficial phreatophytes.
The basinwide hydrometeorological study of probable storms for aid in spillway design for the eastern slopes of the Sierra Nevadas and for the Rogue River basin was continued.
Six detailed unit hydrograph studies were prepared for exchange through the Interagency Committee on Water Resources.
Cooperative investigations of the effects of land treatment and conservation practices on vield of streamflow were continued with the Agricultural Research Service and Soil Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture.
Coordination continued with the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, in the preparation of flood control operating rules for several Bureau reservoirs.
Study was initiated on emergency operating rules for use in spillway design.
Preliminary analyses were completed to evaluate the complex relationships of precipitation and temperature to snowmelt and glacier melt runoff in several Alaskan streams.
A major publication issued during the year was the comprehensive book, Design of Small Dams.
The book presents instructions, standards, and procedures for use in the design of small dams.
It is intended to serve primarily as a guide to safe practices for those concerned with the design of small dams in public works programs in the United States.
A pamphlet, Irrigation on Western Farms, written and published jointly by the Bureau of Reclamation and the Soil Conservation Service, Department of Agriculture, summarizes the technological advances that have been made in irrigation practices within the past 15 years.
It retails for 40 cents.
Design of Small Dams sells for $6.50.
Both books are available at the office of the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D.C., or the Bureau of Reclamation, Attention Code 841, Denver Federal Center, Building 53, Denver 25, Colo.
Also published were technical records on the design and construetion of Tecolote Tunnel, Delta-Mendota Canal, Glen Canyon bridge, Cachuma Dam, Folsom powerplant and switchyard, and Kortes Dam and powerplant.
An engineering monograph on a rapid method of construction control for embankments of cohesive soil was issued during the year.
The Bureau's research accomplishments during the past 10 years were described in a publication entitled "Research—Engineering Methods and Materials," issued in fiscal year 1960.
In addition to summarizing accomplishments, the publication deseribed research in progress and that planned for the future.
Issued during the year were 139 laboratory reports covering research and testing in concrete and concrete materials, earth materials, hydraulics, bituminous construction, protective coatings, corrosion of metals, structural problems, seepage control, and weed control.
The impressive upsurge in public use of reclamation projects that has been apparent for the past several years continues unabated.
In calendar year 1959 recreational use on the 174 reservoirs and other public use areas in the 17 contiguous western States totaled 22.7 million visitor days.
Recreational use during 1959 represents an increase of 3.2 million visitor days over the 19.4 million reported for calendar year 1958, and more than double the use reported in 1955.
The absence of general authority to construct recreational facilities with Federal funds on older projects poses many problems for organizations having responsibility for public use administration of reclamation reservoir areas.
These organizations (mostly States and counties or their administrative subdivisions) to which authority for public use administration has been transferred, often find that available funds do not keep pace with increases in public use.
These problems generally are not characteristic of nationally significant recreation areas administered by the Department's National Park Service, or reservoir areas within national forests administered by the U.S. Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture.
Inequities of the present situation are being recognized on many new projects where nonreimbursable Federal funds have been and are being provided in project authorizations.
An example of this latter situation, where recreation has been recognized in the project authorization, is the Colorado River storage project.
If the problem of adequate financing can be overcome reclamation reservoirs will undoubtedly prove to be even more effective in meeting public use demands for recreation.
The value of reclamation development for fish and wildlife purposes has been recognized since the beginning of the reclamation program in 1902.
The resource potentials of reclamation reservoirs and other project works has been only partially utilized, however, because of limitations in general authority to carry out appropriate fish and wildlife development programs.
In specific instances authorizing legislation has provided such authority in connection with certain specific project features.
In other instances fish and wildlife developments have been carried forward under State programs through formal agreements with the Bureau of Reclamation.
Obviously, programs of this kind have been only partially adequate in utilizing project resources that were appropriate for fish and wildlife.
Enactment of the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act on August 12, 1958 (Public Law 624, 85th Congress, 2d sess., 72 Stat. 563), strengthened Federal responsibility for fish and wildlife development on new reclamation projects.
This act provides that equal consideration be given, in the project development process, to fish and wildlife along with other reclamation functions.
New reclamation projects include evaluation of fish and wildlife in the development of project plans and in the allocation of project costs.
A specific fishery enhancement project under this program was the redesign of outlets for the Whiskeytown Dam, on California's Trinity River division, to provide for water releases from two levels in the dam to improve temperature control for the conservation of fish.
At the request of the Department of State, the Bureau of Reclamation entered into an agreement with the International Cooperation Administration to assist the Helmand Valley Authority of the Government of Afghanistan in bringing the Helmand Valley project to a more satisfactory level of operating efficiency.
An initial team was assigned to this project to lay the groundwork for an expanded operation for the next 3 to 5 years.
This group will provide the Afghans with technical advice and on-the-job training in the operation and maintenance of an irrigation system.
The previously established project undertaking the reconnaissance of the Blue Nile River basin in Ethiopia, as part of the ICA program for that country, was expanded by the end of the fiscal year.
Visual reconnaissance of the basin was completed by helicopter, the basic hydrologic net established, and extensive geologic, and preliminary soil classification investigations accomplished.
Continuing activities in support of the U.S. Government's technical aid program consisted of providing on-the-job training of foreign engineers and technicians at Bureau of Reclamation facilities, and the provision of reclamation specialists for short details to various countries on specific problems.
The training program has seen 369 people from 35 countries spend from a few days up to a full year in various Bureau offices.
1. FAO Watershed Study Group.
This group composed of 32 participants from 19 different countries made a 2-month coast-to-coast tour including visits to the Riverton, Central Valley, and Salt River projects.
2. Japanese Agriculture Productivity Team.
This group of six Japanese agricultural officials was escorted on a 3-month tour of Bureau projects and other agricultural areas by three Bureau representatives, each accompanying the group for 1 month.
The detailing of Bureau specialists to assist various countries with specific problems involved visits to 12 countries and provided advice on problems of design, construction, operations, farm settlement, geology, and project planning.
In addition, extended personnel assignments were continued, providing advisory services on design and construction problems of the Snowy Mountains project in Australia and to completion of the Wu Sheh project in Formosa.
All these activities were undertaken at the request of the International Cooperation Administration, the United Nations, or the government of the foreign country involved through the International Educational Exchange Service of the Department of State.
Funds to cover all costs of this program are provided by the agency requesting the services.
BONNEVILLE POWER ADMINISTRATION, authorized by the Bonneville Project Act of 1937, is the designated marketing agency of the Department of the Interior for 17 hydroelectric generating plants of the U.S. Columbia River Power System currently completed or under construction.
Power was marketed during fiscal year 1960 from nine U.S. Corps of Engineers plants and four of the Department's Bureau of Reclamation plants with an installed generating capacity of 6,033,250 kilowatts.
These include existing projects and projects under construction where initial generators have been installed.
With completion of the projects under construction the nameplate rating will be 7,594, 250 kilowatts, and with completion of the authorized projects nameplate rating will be nearly 8,900,000 kilowatts.
Projects existing, under construction and authorized for construction by the Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation are shown in table 1.
Additions to the U.S. Columbia River Power System in fiscal year 1960 have a nameplate rating of 312,000 kilowatts.
Four units of 78,000 kilowatts each were added at the Corps of Engineers project, The Dalles, leaving two units to be installed for the completed project.
Existing storage capacity usable for power in Federal reservoirs is 9.868,500 acre-feet.
An additional 414,000 acre-feet will be provided by Cougar and Hills Creek on which construction is underway, and 5,343,000 acre-feet will be provided by Libby and Green Peter projects which are authorized for construction.
Addition of 825,250 kilowatts of nameplate rating by non-Federal utilities increased the generating capacity of non-Federal resources in the area served by the Bonneville Power Administration to a total of 3,644,580 kilowatts.
Future additions under construction or licensed for construction by non-Federal utilities would add 2,464,600 kilowatts to the area's resources.
Generation by the principal electric utility systems of the Pacifie Northwest during the fiscal year 1960 is shown in the accompanying chart.
With the exception of Chelan County and Pend Oreille County Public Utility Districts, all utilities listed are members of the Northwest Power Pool.
These two are included because they provide substantial amounts of generation to the pool.
The Utah Power and Light Co. and the British Columbia Electric Co. are members of the pool but are not included as their major service areas are outside the region.
A total of 59.2 percent of the energy generated by the major utilities of the region was provided by the U.S. Columbia River Power System.
In addition to its other load, Bonneville Power Administration provided 8.4 billion kilowatt-hours of energy to meet the net requirements of eight other pool utilities.
Bonneville Power Administration's electric energy account for fiscal year 1960 is shown in table 2.
Bonneville Power Administration, as part of its marketing function is responsible for construction, operation, and maintenance of transmission facilities to transmit the power to the region's load centers.
The administration's transmission grid at the end of the fiscal year consisted of 8,028 circuit miles of high voltage transmission lines and 201 substations.
Bonneville Power Administration's high voltage transmission grid serves as the "backbone" for all interconnected utilities of the Pacifie Northwest.
The administration's transmission network had 424 points of connection as of June 30, 1960, almost double the 256 connections of 10 years ago.
These include interconnections with all the principal utilities having generating facilities in the region.
The wheeling program under which the Federal transmission grid is made available for transmission of non-Federal power generation to area load centers increased by 40.3 percent in fiscal year 1960 over the previous year.
The Bonneville Power Administration wheeled or transferred for other utilities 6.7 billion kilowatt-hours of energy as compared to 4.8 billion kilowatt-hours the previous year.
During the same period other utilities wheeled or transferred 2.1 billion kilowatt-hours of energy for the Government.
Power is being delivered under long-term firm capacity contracts from the Pelton project of the Portland General Electric Co., the Box Canyon project of the Pend Oreille Public Utility District and the Priest Rapids project of the Grant County Public Utility District.
Excess capacity contracts cover power from the Swift projeet of the Pacific Power and Light Co., the Rock Island project of the Chelan County Public Utility Distriet, the Priest Rapids project of the Grant County Public Utility District, and into the region from the California Oregon Power Co. and the Idaho Power Co.
Major transmission additions completed during the year in Oregon included a 230,000-volt line between Albany and Toledo, to supply additional industrial power for the Toledo area and a 115,000-volt line between Finn Rock and Leaburg near Eugene, to serve the lumbering and resort area of the upper McKenzie Valley.
In the Columbia Basin Reclamation area in Washington, a 115,000-volt line was added between Sand Dunes and Larson, near Moses Lake and a 33,000-kilovolt-ampere substation at Larson.
Construction under way at the close of the fiscal year included a 345,000-volt, 128-mile line from Chelan County Public Utility District's Rocky Reach hydroelectric project to Maple Valley, near Seattle, Wash., to bring the output of the project to western Washington; a 23-mile, 230,000-volt line from Rocky Reach hydroelectric project to Columbia, near Wenatchee, Wash.
During fiseal year 1960, BPA sold 29.7 billion kilowatt-hours of electric energy for about $69,000,000, an average of 2.32 mills per kilowatt-hour.
Energy sales increased 3.6 percent over the previous year.
Sales to publicly owned utilities continued to increase at a higher rate than sales to other classes of customers.
Between 1950 and 1960, sales to publicly owned utilities increased 273 percent, while total sales increased 128 percent.
Increased non-Federal generation, most of which was transferred over the Bonneville Power Administration transmission system, resulted in reduction in BPA sales to privately owned utilities, and to cities of Seattle and Tacoma, Wash.
The aluminum companies increased their purchases of firm power during 1960 by about 60,000 kilowatts, which is a 10 percent increase over 1959.
Sale of interruptible power to aluminum plants decreased by 7 percent from the previous year, with most of the decrease shown by those plants increasing their purchase of firm power.
Sales of interruptible power to the aluminum industry have decreased by 270,000 kilowatts since 1956.
An increase in energy deliveries to other industries and Federal agencies results from their increased operations during the 1959 fiscal year.
The energy consumption level in June, 1960 was about equal to June, 1959.
Bonneville's industrial customers have, in the aggregate, an estimated capacity to use power at the rate of approximately 1,800,000 kilowatts.
As of June 30, 1960, their power purchases from the Government and from other sources totaled 1,417,000 kilowatts; leaving idle plant capacity of about 400,000 kilowatts.
Firm deliveries from the Government were 1,102,000, interruptible deliveries were 180,000 kilowatts, and 135,000 kilowatts were purchased from non-Federal sources.
Detail of energy deliveries by classes of customers for 1960 compared with 1959 are shown in table 3.
As a result of the favorable power situation and unprecedented expansion of hydroelectric generation in the Pacific Northwest, Bonneville Power Administration was able to offer for sale last May a block of 150,000 kilowatts of firm power for industrial expansion.
Concurrently, a new category of high priority secondary power called “industrial power," limited to 400,000 kilowatts was offered.
Contract negotiations in progress at the end of the fiscal year indicate the new power offer will result in the establishment of two new electroprocess industries in the region and plant expansion of two existing industries with an estimated private investment of about $140 million in new plant equipment.
Peak requirements of the four plants are expected to total 177,000 kilowatts of firm and 222,000 kilowatts of secondary power.
The new industrial sales are expected to increase Bonneville Power Administration revenues by about $6,500,000 a year.
Bonneville Power Administration delivered about 69 percent of its energy sales at an average cost of 2.15 mills per kilowatt-hour to industries, and to utilities having substantial generating facilities.
A summary of energy sales for fiscal year 1960, classified by rate schedules is shown in table 4.
Special studies of the Bonneville Power Administration's wholesale rate structure and payout schedules resulted in continuance of the present basic wholesale rate of $17.50 per kilowatt-year for another 5-year period effective December 20, 1959, with approval by the Federal Power Commission.
Bonneville Power Administration has maintained the same basic rate level since beginning of operations in 1938.
Financial results of operations for the Bonneville Power Administration for fiscal year 1960 compared with fiscal year 1959 are shown in summary form in tables 5, 6 and 7.
These data are necessarily preliminary inasmuch as the annual audit by the General Accounting Office was not complete at the time of the preparation of these statements.
However, it is anticipated that final figures will not differ materially from those now available.
The financial information is presented on two bases: (1) an accrued cost accounting basis in accordance with the uniform system of accounts prescribed by the Federal Power Commission for electric utilities, and (2) a payout basis.
The principal differences between these methods are: (1) payout is based on cash receipts rather than accrued revenues but it does inelude accrued expenses with the exception of noncash exchange account items; (2) in lieu of depreciation expense payout substitutes amortization of the capital investment over periods of time shorter than the estimated service lives used in cost accounting for determining depreciation expense; and (3) payout provides for use of power revenue receipts to assist in the repayment of irrigation costs, whereas cost accounting does not include such payments as power costs.
It should be noted that the payout requirements govern the system rate level because cash receipts must be adequate to cover the total payout requirements, which are assigned to be repaid from power operations, for all of the projects in the U.S. Columbia River Power System.
A comparative statement of the revenues and expenses of the Bonneville Power Administration on a cost accounting basis for fiscal years 1959 and 1960 is presented in table 5.
Energy sales increased by $2,084,506 or 3.12 percent during the year.
Other electrie revenue increased by $439,622, or 27.23 percent, the large increase being due to the increase in wheeling energy from non-Federal projects to load centers.
Total operating revenue reached $70,998,219 in 1960, an increase for the year of $2,524,128, or 3.69 pereent.
After providing for all expenses of operation, maintenance and interest and the allocations of revenues to the generating projects, net revenues in fiscal year 1960 of $3,447,792 were available for repayment of the capital investment in the transmission system.
Such net revenues were $1,115,616 less than the amount available in 1959.
On a cumulative basis through June 30, 1960, net revenues available for repayment of the transmission system capital investment were $125,- 276,474 and left a surplus of $15,367,767 after providing for depreciation and amortization.
Revenues allocated to the Federal generating projects that supplied power to the Bonneville Power Administration totaled $47,- 078,000 in 1960, an increase of $2,336,000 over 1959.
These allocations are independent of the amount of energy generated but are geared to the schedules necessary to repay the costs allocated to power.
Such costs include operating expenses, interest on and amortization of the capital investment at all of the generating projects, plus financial assistance to irrigation repayment in the case of the Columbia basin and the Yakima projects.
1 Data for fiscal year 1959 have been restated from the previously published figures to make the 1959 information comparable to the data shown for fiscal year 1960 as the result of the reclassification of interchange account credits adopted in fiscal year 1960.
Formerly such transactions were included in the operating expense accounts, but beginning with 1960 the transactions are shown as revenue from the sales of electric energy.
Hence, energy sales for 1959 have been increased by $500,406 and operating expenses (purchased power) have been increased by a corresponding amount.
The final net revenues are not affected.
In fiscal year 1960 interchange credits of $1,023,219 have been included in the energy sales figure.
Table 6 is a condensed statement of assets and liabilities on a cost accounting basis for the investment in Bonneville Power Administration as of June 30, 1959 and 1960.
Electric transmission plant in service at the end of 1960 was nearly $451,000,000, an increase of more than $8,700,000 during the year.
Construction work in progress at the end of the year was approximately $27,700,000, an increase of more than $9,300,000.
The total investment in electric transmission plant increased approximately $18,100,000.
The gross investment of the Federal Government in the Bonneville Power Administration transmission and marketing program increased approximately $41 million.
These gross amounts include, in addition to transmission capital investment, the amounts necessary for operation, maintenance and interest expenses.
Funds returned to the Treasury.
This increase is represented almost entirely by the increase in the investment in electric plant, with the remainder consisting of cash on hand and other miscellaneous assets.
The amount of the Federal investment in the Bonneville Power Administration transmission system and the status of repayment on a payout basis as of June 30, 1960, are shown in table 7.
From the inception of operations to June 30, 1960, the Bonneville Power Administration has returned cash receipts to the Treasury in the aggregate amount of $713,070,391.
Of this total, $403,205,320 has been allocated to the generating projects and $309,865,071 to the transmission system.
A Bonneville Power Administration testing crew checks out a fault locator and phase selector at one of BPA's large substations.
1 Consists of $89,068,000 scheduled amortization and $35,853,925 repaid in excess of scheduled requirements.
The total repayment, $124,921,925 equals 24.8 pereent of the invested capital of $502,773,937.
Total cash receipts covered into the U.S. Treasury by BPA to June 30, 1960.
713,070,391 Less amounts allocated to generating projects.
403,205,320 repaid in full interest on the transmission investment in the amount of $74,116,967 with the balance of $124,921,925 applied to repayment of the capital investment.
This capital repayment exceeded scheduled amortization requirements by $35,853,925 and represented repayments of 24.8 percent of the total capital investment of $502,773,937.
There were several important developments in the power field during fiscal year 1960 that could have a tremendous impact on both the power resources and power operations of the U.S. Columbia River Power System.
One of these important events was an announcement by the International Joint Commission of a general policy statement as a guide for development of upper Columbia river storage projects.
The recently established negotiating committee is currently proceeding with discussions between Canada and the United States.
The U.S. negotiating team is made up of representatives of the Department of Interior, the Corps of Engineers and the State Department.
The potential hydroelectric generation resulting from downstream benefits of the proposed upper Columbia storage projects could make a substantial contribution to the generating capacity of the Columbia river power system.
Completion during the next decade of one or more of these projects would affect many phases of Columbia river power operations and resource planning.
Another important event was start of construction on a dual purpose reactor at the Hanford Atomic Energy Works.
This could be the forerunner of the first large scale generation of electric energy by atomic fission in the Pacific Northwest.
The Federal Power Commission, with the assistance of BPA, has completed its study of the feasibility of installing steam operated generation facilities in connection with the reactor.
The most feasible reactor design under assumptions of the study would produce 654,000 kilowatts during the initial 10-year period of operations, and 756,000 kilowatts over the 25 years following.
Bonneville Power Administration in cooperation with the Department's Bureau of Reclamation and in consultation with interested utilities of the Pacific Northwest and California, completed a study of a proposed intertie between the U.S. Columbia River Power System and northern California.
The study was made in response to a resolution of the Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs adopted May 19, 1959, and was submitted to the Committee on February 17, 1960.
The purpose of the study was to determine the extent of a potential market for.substantial blocks of secondary power currently surplus to the needs of the Pacific Northwest.
The potential market for the power involves a displacement of steam generation in northern California, when such surplus power is available from the Pacific Northwest.
Negotiations relative to a proposed sale of surplus energy to the Pacific Gas and Electric Co. were suspended at the request of the Senate Committee pending conclusion of an independent study sponsored by the State of California of an extra high voltage “common carrier" type of interconnection.
The committee desired to consider legislation insuring that the construction of an intertie would not deprive power consumers of the Pacifie Northwest of power produced in the region.
GROSS REVENUES of the Department of the Interior's Southwestern Power Administration for fiscal year 1960 were $15,012,- 588.74, representing an increase of $479,538.86, or 3.3 percent over the gross revenue for fiscal year 1959.
Since fiscal year 1958, the year Southwestern Power Administration's adjusted rates became effective, the revenue has increased.
During the same period operating expense has increased.
A continuing effort is being made to obtain a more stable relationship between expense and revenue.
During fiscal year 1960, private utilities accounted for 32 percent of the revenue dollar, electric cooperatives 57 percent, municipalities 9 percent, and Public Authorities 2 percent, as compared to fiscal year 1951 when the private utilities accounted for 82 percent, electric cooperatives 16 percent, municipalities 2 percent, and Public Authorities 0 percent.
Table 1 presents a source and application of funds statement as of June 30, 1959, and 1960.
Southwestern Power Administration facilities, Springfield, Mo., the bub of Interior's Power Marketing System, grapbically portray the continuing progress toward integration of all sources of power in the Southwest region.
This substation, with associated switching vard, dispatching center, and communications equipment, interconnecting six 161-kilovolt and four 69-kilovolt lines providing electric service to customers of SPA, G&T cooperatives, municipalities, and private companies, will ultimately be the greatest point of power exchange in the area.
The original cost investment in transmission facilities of Southwestern Power Administration amounted to $27,107,525.85, as of June 30,1960.
During fiscal year 1960, the electric power utilized by Southwestern Power Administration was obtained as follows: 1,672.0 million kilowatt-hours generated at Federal multiple-purpose projects, operated by the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, 511.6 million kilowatt-hours obtained from thermal-electric generation of other, public and private utilities, making a total of 2,183.6 million kilowatt-hours.
A total of 1,820.9 million kilowatt-hours (83.4 percent was marketed as firm energy, 240 million kilowatt-hours (11.0 percent) was marketed as secondary and dump energy, 122.7 million kilowatt-hours (5.6 percent) were system losses.
Deliveries to preference customers amounted to 1,528.3 million kilowatt-hours, representing a 1.2-percent increase over the previous year.
Energy sales of Southwestern Power Administration for the fiscal year 1960 were 2,183.6 million kilowatt-hours, representing an increase of 137.1 million kilowatt-hours or 7.1 percent over the energy sales for the previous year.
The following table demonstrates the comparison of sales, in millions of kilowatt-hours, for fiscal years 1959 and 1960 by rate schedules.
Southwestern Power Administration has constructed transmission facilities interconnecting six Federal multiple-purpose projects from which it markets electric power and energy.
These facilities have been interconnected with the systems of other public and private utilities so that Federal transmission facilities are minimized.
In order to serve preference customers at their load centers without the duplication of transmission facilities, Southwestern Power Administration has contractual agreements with several private utility companies and with rural electric generation and transmission cooperatives to serve its customers from the transmission facilities of those electric companies and cooperatives.
The principal arrangements embodied in these contractual agreements provide for service to customers of SPA from facilities of others.
During the past 2 years, three new basic power contracts have been completed.
Outstanding of these is a 25-year contract with Tex-La Electric Cooperative, Inc., composed of cooperatives and municipalities in east Texas and Louisiana, which establishes a contractual arrangement for the sale of the entire 17,000 kilowatt ouput of Narrows Dam, with an additional 45,000 kilowatts from Southwestern Power Administration's interconnected transmission system.
The contract becomes effective October 1, 1960.
Breakers installed at Spa substation, Clinton, Mo.
Extensive expansion of these installations was required to provide for interconnection of Kansas City Power and Light Co. and Missouri Public Service Co., Kansas City, Mo.
A contract, unanimously endorsed by preference customer groups, with the Kansas City Power and Light Co., also established an arrangement for the sale of hydroelectric peaking power.
This new contract establishes greater integration and utilization of the Federal and non-Federal power in the Southwest area and has resulted in the development of a market for large blocks of hydroelectric peaking capacity on terms which will enable Southwestern Power Administration to make available by withdrawal any or all of such capacity as necessary to meet the requirements of preference type customers.
Also, a contract of this type was signed with the Missouri Public Service Co., Kansas City, Mo.
A third contract was completed with the Oklahoma Gas and Electric Co. which provided for the sale of 1,200 hours of energy per kilowatt of peaking capacity annually rather than the 1,800 hours per kilowatt of earlier contracts.
These three new contractual arrangements will result in full utilization of hydroelectric power generated from the Federal multiplepurpose projects in the Southwest.
Construction crews at SPA substation, Weleetka, Okla., key point of interchange of power for Oklahoma and Texas customers of SPA.
Extensive expansion of this substation with related facilities wbich will provide for doubling the power capacity—from 30,000 kilowatts to 60,000 kilowatts—is nearing completion.
A contract was completed and service was started in fiscal year 1960 to one new preference customer—the city of Walters, Okla.
Intensive studies are now under way for effecting improvements of present contractual arrangements with G&T cooperatives throughout the Southwest.
Contracts with the Western Farmers Electric Cooperative, Anadarko, Okla., and with the N.W. Electric Power Cooperative, Cameron, Mo., have been amended to provide for conversion of part of the Government's commitments for firm power to peaking power, insofar as the loads will permit.
This amendment will assure conservation of non-firm energy and make additional amounts of capacity useable as dependable peaking capacity from the Federal system.
The same contractual changes are now being negotiated with the Central Electric Power Cooperative, Jefferson City, Mo., and with the Sho-Me Power Corporation, Marshfield, Mo.
Conforming with the pattern already set with other G&T cooperatives, Southwestern Power Administration's contract with the KAMO Electric Cooperative, Vinita, Okla., has been amended to change the metering of the Government's power from the points of delivery to the points at which the Government interconnects with the KAMO system.
The result is that KAMO is responsible for losses in its system.
As compensation for these loses, KAMO receives the benefit of the diversity in load within its own system.
The installed capacity and capability in the hydroelectric and steam electric plants in Southwestern Power Administration's interconnected system are shown in table 2.
The installed capacity of the interconnected Federal hydroelectric system was increased to 601,000 kilowatts when two units at the Table Rock project were placed in operation on June 1, 1959.
Reservoir inflow for 9 months of the fiscal year 1960 was well above normal with average flow for the year being about equal to median.
The reservoir system storage was approximately 90 percent full at the beginning of the fiscal year, and was 96 percent full on June 30, 1960.
The net generation for all Federal projects currently in operation is shown in table 3.
Power Administration since fiscal 1957.
The net generation from the interconnected hydro system amounted to 1,471.2 million kilowatthours.
Construction during fiscal year 1960 saw (1) the completion of the 40-mile 161-kilovolt transmission line connecting Table Rock project to the Southwestern Power Administration's substation at Springfield, Mo.
Chas.
DURING FISCAL YEAR 1960, Southeastern Power Administration marketed 1,213,000 kilowatts of capacity (with peak generation of 1,462,760 kilowatts) and 4,048,025,373 kilowatt-hours of energy.
It was sold to 52 public bodies, 74 rural electric cooperatives, 1 Federal agency, and 6 privately owned utilities.
Sales during the year earned $20,650,668.97, as compared with $14,863,863.87 for the previous year, bringing the revenue earned in all years to a total of $111,269,108.64.
The output was generated at 11 Corps of Engineers projects.
They were the Wolf Creek, Dale Hollow, Center Hill, Old Hickory, and Cheatham projects in Kentucky and Tennessee, the Allatoona and Buford projects in Georgia, the Clark Hill project in Georgia and South Carolina, the Jim Woodruff project in Florida, and the John H. Kerr and Philpott projects in Virginia.
The installed generating capacity of 1,283,600 kilowatts includes a 12,000-kilowatt unit installed but not in commercial operation at Cheatham project in Tennessee.
Construction by the Corps continued on Cheatham as well as three other projects—Walter F. George in Georgia and Alabama, Hartwell in Georgia and South Carolina and Barkley in Kentucky.
The construction under way will add 524,000 kilowatts of installed capacity.
The combined output of Wolf Creek, Center Hill, and Dale Hollow projects continued to be sold to the Tennessee Valley Authority under a long-term contract.
The entire output of the Old Hickory project and the output of two units of Cheatham were sold under another long-term contract with the Authority.
All of the Philpott project output was sold to Appalachian Power Co. under temporary arrangements pending the conelusion of negotiations for long-term sale.
Two-thirds of the Kerr project's output continued to be sold under long-term contracts to the Virginia Electric and Power Co., and to 17 cooperatives in Virginia and North Carolina; and the remainder continued to be sold under long-term contracts to Carolina Power and Light Co., and to 16 public bodies and cooperatives in North Carolina.
Part of the Clark Hill project output was sold under long-term contracts to two public bodies in South Carolina.
One-half of the output of the Clark Hill project and the entire output of the Allatoona and Buford projects were sold under long-term contracts to Georgia Power Co. and 86 public bodies and cooperatives in Georgia.
The output of the Jim Woodruff project was sold under long-term contracts to Florida Power Corporation and 6 public bodies and cooperatives in Florida.
The Congress appropriated for the fiscal year $261,000 for headquarters operation and maintenance, and $455,625 for the purchase of firming energy and the payment of wheeling fees.
Southeastern's working force numbered 33 employees at the beginning of the fiscal year and 34 employees when the year ended.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT activities of the Office of Saline Water and the program to construct and operate five saline water conversion demonstration plants is attracting worldwide attention.
Lowering water tables and the increased competition for readily available surface supplies in this and other nations, especially those in the arid areas of the world, is quickening the interest in the future potential of low-cost converted sea or brackish water.
A sharp increase in the number of inquiries or visits from representatives of foreign countries seeking information on the latest developments in the state of the art was readily noted throughout the year.
An increasing number of United States research or industrial firms began to invest research funds or divert technical personnel from other projects to develop solutions for the problems of low-cost saline water conversion.
The contracts awarded by the Office of Saline Water during fiscal year 1960 mark an all-time high both in size and number.
Fifty-four contracts totaling $2,854,468 were awarded by the Office for research, development, and demonstration plant construction.
Many of the contracts awarded by the Office only partially covered the cost of the research and development projects.
The balance of the cost was assumed by the research organization or industrial firm, giving concrete evidence of the stepped-up interest of private companies in the development of new or improved conversion processes.
Many formidable problems still must be solved before economically competitive fresh water can be obtained from the sea.
The most efficient sea water conversion plant operating in the world today is producing 2.8 million gallons of fresh water per day at a cost of about $2 per thousand gallons.
This is far too expensive to be considered as a source of supply for any area where natural fresh water is readily available.
There are, however, areas where natural fresh water is not available in the quantities required.
To meet the water demands in some of these areas, conversion plants with a combined capacity of about 20 million gallons of fresh water per day are now in operation.
There is necessarily a lag between the developments of the research phase of any program and their practical application.
Substantial strides have been made in the search for new or improved saline water conversion processes.
During the coming year, three plants will be under construction by the Office which will incorporate a number of the latest process developments.
Utilizing this new technology these plants are expected to produce fresh water from the sea for the first time for less than $1 per thousand gallons.
Once we have accomplished that objective, how much lower can we reasonably expect to drive down in the foreseeable future, the cost of converting sea and brackish waters to fresh?
The prospect is so exciting, and the possibility so recent, that we must answer that we do not know in absolute terms.
But on the basis of what we do know, we can reasonably assume that we shall soon be close to producing a thousand gallons of potable water from salt or brackish sources for 50 cents.
That figure is lower than many people now pay and is within a dime of what most Americans pay for water from their taps.
In community after community, the curves of cost—of converted water and water from rivers and wells—are beginning to cross.
And when they do— and that day is not far distant—the widespread and practical use of converted water will be here.
Public Law 85-883, approved by President Dwight D. Eisenhower on September 2.
1958, provided for the construction and operation of five saline water conversion plants to demonstrate the reliability, engineering, operating and economic potentials of the most promising of the presently known processes.
Plains and the arid areas of the Southwest for plants designed to convert brackish water to fresh.
The act further requires each plant to utilize a different process and each process was to be chosen at 3 month intervals beginning on March 2, 1959.
The selection deadlines were met due to the diligent efforts of a special Process Selection Board representing science, industry, and Government.
Members of the board are: Dr. Ralph Morgen, president, Rose Polytechnic Institute; Dudley F. Phelps, president, the J. G. White Engineering Corporation; and Captain Ivan Monk, Department of the Navy.
Acting on the recommendations of this board, Secretary Seaton selected three of the processes during the last quarter of fiscal year 1959 and two in fiscal year 1960.
The selection of processes was completed ahead of the schedule set forth by the Congress in the authorizing legislation.
Nearly 200 communities, many offering more than one site, applied for one of the authorized plants.
A Site Selection Board consisting of three engineers with vast experience in water supply problems was appointed to evaluate the proposed sites.
Members of this board, Mr. S. T. Powell, of Sheppard T. Powell and Associates; Mr. Lewis S. Finch, vice president and chief engineer of the Indianapolis Water Co.: and Dr. W. C. Schroeder, University of Maryland, carefully studied information submitted by the interested cities and communities and personally inspected many of the proposed sites before submitting their findings to the Secretary of the Interior.
By the end of fiscal vear 1960 Secretary Seaton had selected four sites and proposed sites on the east coast were being processed for final selection.
Long tube vertical multiple-effect distillation, Freeport, Tex.
Multistage flash distillation, San Diego, Calif.
Electrodialysis, Webster, S. Dak.
Forced-circulation vapor compression, Roswell, N. Mex.
The construction specifications for the first plant at Freeport, Tex., were issued on April 1, and bids were opened on May 24, 1960.
The Chicago Bridge and Iron Co. submitted the successful low bid of $1,246,250.
The plant is scheduled to be completed and in operation by May 7, 1961.
The specifications for the second and third plants were completed by the end of the fiscal year and have been issued.
The Freeport plant was designed by W. L. Badger Associates of Ann Arbor, Mich.
The Fluor Corporation of Los Angeles is designing the San Diego plant, and the Department's Bureau of Reclamation is preparing the specifications for the Webster plant.
In any dynamic research and development program, considerable emphasis must be placed on fundamental research, since new ideas or new processes can be developed only through such basie studies.
The conversion processes already selected for demonstration certainly are not the best that can be developed, even though they are the most advanced of their type.
Research can improve the efficieney of those methods, develop entirely new methods, and solve specific related problems such as heat transfer, corrosion, scale deposition, and others.
Current research includes laboratory and theoretical investigations on 6 or 7 new conversion processes, scale formation in distillation and electrodialysis equipment, membrane development (both ion selective and osmotic types), heat transfer, corrosion, use of radioisotopes, etc.
One potentially promising new conversion process involves the use of gas hydrates such as light hydrocarbons and halogenated methanes and ethanes.
These substances form solid hydrates containing many moles of water per mole of agent.
Essentially, the process consists of contacting saline water with a liquid hydrating agent, separating the crystalline hydrate formed under the proper conditions, washing and decomposing the hydrate into pure water and hydrating agent.
Fundamental research aimed at determining the various agents which form hydrates at reasonable temperatures and pressures and the thermodynamic properties of those agents is in progress.
Another new system under study utilizes a combination of electrodialysis and resin-bed treatment, made possible by new materials and techniques which may minimize the inherent difficulties of each process.
The proposed method utilizes conductive ion exchange materials which can be regenerated by means of an electric current and ion selective membranes to reduce the tendency of mixing the two solutions.
Work on determining the practicality of the osmionic-conversion process has been continued.
This method is somewhat similar to electrodialysis except that no electrodes or outside electric current is required.
The driving force causing demineralization is produced by the concentration difference between a brine and feed water.
Three laboratory prototypes have been fabricated and successfully operated.
The deposition of salts in distillation and electrodialysis equipment under certain conditions is a serious problem and it is essential that methods for eliminating or alleviating scale be developed.
Two fundamental research investigations aimed at obtaining a better understanding of scale formation in both types of equipment and developing means of controlling it are being carried on.
Basic research investigations having as their primary objectives the development of improved or new ion selective and osmotic membranes are underway.
If successful, such membranes will benefit the electrodialysis, osmionic and reverse osmosis processes.
The use of acoustic vibrations to improve heat transfer rates in distillation units is under study and the first phase of a study on corrosion problems attendant with saline water conversion is nearing completion.
Successful operation was obtained on a 15,000-gallon per day pilot plant using a direct freezing process.
This new process uses flash evaporation of precooled saline water to make ice, followed by washing of brine from the ice.
At the close of the fiscal year, the pilot plant was being moved from Syracuse, N.Y., to Harbor Island, N.C., for additional operation on sea water.
Increased activity in the development of freezing processes was reflected in the initiation of a project to build a 35,000 gallons per day pilot plant utilizing direct freezing with a secondary refrigerant and incorporating two ice crystal washing systems previously developed in the laboratory.
Another promising approach in the development of freezing as a practicable means of salt water conversion was realized in the operation of a laboratory pilot unit wherein the size of the ice crystals was controlled so that washing procedures could be simplified.
Economic projections of laboratory and pilot plant data indicate that freezing processes will compete favorably with developments in distillation.
The operation of the long-tube-vertical pilot equipment at Harbor Island has continued in an effort to control the calcium sulphate scale problem by the same type of sludge recirculation technique previously developed for calcium hydroxide.
Also at Harbor Island, the testing of the large rotary vapor compression still was completed.
However, additional research and development on rotor designs and waterspreading techniques and additional economic analyses were continued in the laboratories.
Tests made on two types of small rotary vapor compression stills showed further development is necessary.
Work was begun on a new distillation system based upon development of a wiped-film evaporator.
Studies on the vapor reheat flash process in which there are no metallic heat transfer barriers continued with emphasis on the liquid-liquid heat exchange phases.
Membrane processes, particularly electrodialysis, have shown important application in the treatment of brackish waters; future development in both membrane and equipment may make these processes useful for the conversion of sea water.
During the year, four types of commercial membranes have been evaluated and three different types of commercial equipment have been operated as a part of the experimental electrodialysis program underway at the Department's Bureau of Reclamation laboratories in Denver, Colo.
Plans have been made for use of a brackish well water site near Denver for additional field testing programs.
A means of practical use of ion exchange resins in sea water demineralization may result from a new project initiated for the pilot unit study of partial removal of scale components from sea water before conversion.
The process depends upon using the concentrated effluent brine from a distillation conversion process to regenerate the resins.
Successful operation of both plastics and glass-cover basin types of solar stills has been obtained at the Daytona Beach, Fla., solar distillation research station.
Ways to reduce cost of construction have been determined.
Prototypes of tilted types of solar stills are being installed for evaluation.
Research on plastic materials is underway at the station and at several laboratories.
During the vear a series of four conferences were held on processes development.
These were attended by representatives of contractors, cooperators, and proposers of research projects in the four major fields.
One on distillation processes and one on membrane processes were held in Washington, D.C. One on freezing was held at Syracuse, N.Y., and one on solar distillation at Daytona Beach, Fla.
The latest developments were discussed at these informal symposia and desirable future programs outlined.
Thirty-three processes development contracts were current during the year.
Ten technical reports were published.
Of particular interest is the new contract initiating the engineering study of a new chemical process based upon the use of hydrocarbon hydrates as a means of desalting water.
The contracts include a study being made jointly with the State of California on a solar heat application for multistage flash evaporation; research on means of scale prevention; investigation of secondary heat transfer media; compilation of technical data; development of infrared reflecting plastics; evaluation of external condensation with solar stills; and application of atomized suspension techniques for disposal of concentrated brines.
Cooperation and participation with the Department of Defense was effected on several development programs.
The wiped-film evaporator development is jointly sponsored with the Navy.
The Daytona facilities were made available for testing of an Army vapor-compression still and the Navy furnished evaporators for use in the ion exchange development.
No one process will ever be completely practical for all saline water conversion.
Different processes are advantageous for either of the two major divisions of water to be treated—sea water and brackish water.
In addition, other factors related to location, such as fuel costs, weather conditions, and waste disposal conditions, can determine which of several processes would be the most economical.
THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY for Mineral Resources discharges the responsibilities of the Secretary of the Interior with respect to the Department's programs in the field of the development and utilization of minerals and metals, including mineral fuels.
He exercises supervision over: the Geological Survey, the Bureau of Mines, the Office of Minerals Exploration, the Office of Oil and Gas, the Office of Minerals Mobilization, and the Office of Geography.
The Assistant Secretary serves as the principal spokesman for the Department of the Interior in the field of mineral affairs at the policymaking level within the Federal Government.
He participates in meetings of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy as the Department's liaison representative, and is the Department's representative on the National Export Expansion Committee.
This Office continued to coordinate and direct the Department's activities under the Export Control Act, administered by the Department of Commerce.
During the past year the Department furnished technical and scientific information on a wide range of commodities, and advised on the need for export controls to protect the domestic economy.
In addition to the foregoing responsibilities, the Office of the Assistant Secretary, Mineral Resources, is the principal point of contact between the Federal Government and the mineral industries.
Group.
The session, held in Geneva in January-February 1960, resulted in a continuation of voluntary curtailments of sales of lead on the part of several exporting nations.
In light of the improved market situation.
Revised legislation to implement a long-range helium conservation program was submitted.
At the close of the fiscal year the measure, which would contribute substantially to the conservation of this critical resource, had passed the House.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary, Mineral Resources, continued to supply information and advice to the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization concerning administration of the Government's strategic stockpiling program and maintained a review of the overall stockpile situation.
Additionally, the Office continued its active role in advising the Department of Agriculture with respect to acquisition of strategie and critical material for the supplemental stockpile through barter transactions.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary continued its extensive participation in interdepartmental discussions dealing with basic problems of petroleum supply and requirements from both national security and peacetime economic standpoints.
The Assistant Secretary, Mineral Resources, served as chairman of the Oil Import Appeals Board, which was established to hear appeals arising from the program of mandatory import controls on crude petroleum and petroleum products.
By the close of the fiscal year, legislation creating an Office of Coal Research had received approval of the Congress and was later signed by the President.
The measure establishes within the Department of the Interior a new agency to contract for research of immediate benefit to the domestic coal industry.
FOR MORE THAN 80 years the Geological Survey of the Department of the Interior has increasingly obtained information on the occurrence, distribution and quantity of the Nation's vast water and mineral wealth, at the same time gathering information concerning its land surface, and reducing this knowledge to reports and maps of widespread usefulness.
Survey conducted mapping, investigations and reports have helped lay the strong foundation of America's economic well-being.
The need to supply more people with more things has placed heavier responsibilities upon those required to look ahead and to plan for the necessary raw materials and basic data.
The immediate challenge is being met in the Geological Survey by the dedicated men and women who constitute our major asset.
Upon their shoulders falls the burden of developing new techniques for achieving these objectives.
The ability to use the products of intellectual curiosity for the resolution of practical problems in the national economy has been a most significant contribution.
During the past year, while accomplishing the scientific, engineering and administrative functions of the Survey, staff members participated in hundreds of individual projects, produced more than 1,200 reports, circulars, bulletins, geologic maps and professional papers; some 1,350 new topographic maps.
Although the Survey staff has remained about the same in numbers of people employed, the results to be reported this year mark a new high point in overall achievement.
Measuring the earth's magnetic field, a Geological Survey aircraft with trailing magnetometer traverses Chesapeake Bay.
Fact-finding and research activities of the Geologic Division include a wide variety of investigations concerning the earth and man's attempts to understand and use its surface and resources.
These activities can be broadly grouped into three main categories; economic geology, regional geology, and research on geologic processes and principles.
Economic geology is concerned with the study of known and potential deposits in mineral-bearing and mineral fuels-bearing districts, the application of geologic knowledge to the solution of engineering and land development problems, and the acquisition of geologic information to guide the search for new sources of needed mineral raw materials.
Regional geology includes studies of the structure, composition, history, and distribution of the rocks that underlie the United States, its Territories and possessions.
Because the nature of this work is essentially exploratory, its underlying purpose also is, in large part, economic, for it develops the information needed to appraise the potential resources and to plan for the best use of the land.
The research on geologic processes and principles includes observational and experimental studies in the field and in laboratories to develop and extend the usefulness of the geologic sciences.
A wide range of activities supplies information and services to other Federal agencies and is supported by them.
These activities extend geographically over much of the earth and recently have extended into space.
Long-established methods as well as intricate research on new methods are used to aid in the planning and accomplishment of some of the varied tasks of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Science Foundation, the International Cooperation Administration, the National Cancer Institute, the Bureau of Public Roads, and the Department's Bureau of Mines.
In addition, geologic programs were carried on during the past year in cooperation with 18 States and Puerto Rico.
These range from geologic studies aimed at small immediate economic objectives to broad geologie mapping programs contributing to the ultimate publication of modern State geologic maps.
During the past vear the results of the Geologic Division's investigations were published in 26 professional papers, 74 bulletins, 111 maps, and 3 circulars.
In addition, 79 reports were placed on open file, and more than 200 reports were published in scientific journals.
A summary of the important results of the Geologic Division's current work was published as Geological Survey Professional Paper 400, entitled "Geologic Research, 1960."
The first portion of this report is primarily a synopsis of important new findings, and the second part consisting of 232 short papers summarizes results of individual investigations.
Detailed geologic mapping and other field studies primarily concerned with economic geology were in progress in many areas from coast to coast during the past year, and many significant results were achieved.
A few of the highlights are cited below.
Base and ferrous metals.
Geologic investigations being carried on in several of the major mining distriets have resulted in the discovery of new deposits or yielded important new geologic guides that will aid future exploration in all mining districts where geologic associations are similar.
Counties, Mich.: and recognition of geologic guides useful to future exploration of the metalliferous veins in the Butte area, Mont., in the Michigan copper distriet, in the copper-bearing rocks near Pima, Ariz., and in the Coeur d’Alene lead-zinc-silver mining district, Idaho.
Light metals and industrial minerals.
A new mineral association of beryllium is being studied in the Mount Wheeler mine, Nev., where the beryllium-bearing minerals phenacite, bertrandite, and beryl have been found in association with scheelite and fluorite along vertical quartz veins.
Because these beryllium-bearing minerals are similar in appearance to quartz and feldspar, they may have been overlooked in the past.
Their recognition may lead to the discovery of new beryllium deposits in this area.
In the tin districts of the Seward Peninsula of Alaska, beryllium has been identified in samples from bedrock sources at the Lost River mine, and at the Ear Mountain and Cape Mountain tin areas.
Beryl and phenacite have been identified, and idocrase samples collected in the region also are consistently high in beryllium.
Studies of clay beds in Maryland indicate that extensive deposits are suitable for use as fire-clay and other deposits are suitable for use in the manufacture of lightweight concrete aggregate.
Of special interest, these latter"bloating" clays underlie extensive areas that include many potential strip-mining sites.
The distribution of valuable deposits of fint clays in northeastern Kentucky has been studied and mapped.
Geochemical exploration and minor elements.
Geochemical prospecting techniques require rapid analytical methods suitable for the determination of trace amounts of various metals.
Methods suitable for more than 20 of the more diagnostic elements are in use.
During the past year, a new technique was developed for concentrating ionic constituents of natural waters by resin collectors, and a method was devised for determining the molybdenum content of natural waters employing resin collectors.
Trace amounts of the volatile elements antimony, mercury and arsenic in vegetation can now be analyzed.
A fluorometric procedure for determination of beryllium in rocks has been developed that is sensitive in the range of 1 to 10 parts per million.
Organic fuels.
Investigations that furnish basic mapping and stratigraphic data on possible mineral fuel-bearing strata are in progress in many parts of the country.
For example, a summary of the petroleum possibilities in Alaska delineated six possible petrolem provinces in southern Alaska; three potential petroleum provinces of pre-Cenozoic rocks and several potential petroliferous basins of Cenozoic rocks in central Alaska; and a large area north of the Brooks Range in northern Alaska, where good possibilities exist for petroleum production.
A new estimate of coal reserves of the United States has been made.
Based on latest available data, some 1,660 billion tons remain in the ground, of which about half is assumed to be recoverable.
Studies of several coal fields are in progress, and recent estimates of coal resources have been prepared for the Trinidad field in Huerfano and Las Animas Counties, Colo., an important source of coking coal for the western United States; the Mesa Verde area, Colo.
Studies in the Uinta basin of Utah and Colorado and in the Piceance Creek basin of western Colorado indicate very large reserves of shale oil in beds 15 feet or more in thickness and yielding 15 gallons or more per ton.
Engineering geology.
Geologic data are being used with increasing frequency and success in planning construction and other land development projects, especially in areas of heavy population expansion, and in problems of public safety and public health.
As an example of specific application, the geologic examination of a proposed damsite at Devil Canvon, about 125 miles north of Anchorage, Alaska, indicated that shifting the site 100 feet upstream would avoid a large shear zone.
Relocation of the spillway site was suggested to take advantage of lower excavation costs afforded by the recognition of a favorably located buried preglacial valley.
Similarly, savings in cost, increased safety, and reduction of natural hazards have been achieved in such metropolitan areas as San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Seattle, where studies of landslides permit analysis of potential hazards and plans can be made to avoid or minimize building in areas of probable future slides.
The series of earthquakes at Hebgen Lake, Mont., in the late summer movement of debris and subsidence of a large area some 27 miles long and 14 miles wide.
Geologic mapping was already in progress in this area, and an intensive study of the effects of the earthquake was accomplished promptly.
Selecting the sites for underground nuclear tests, and evaluation of the effects of underground nuclear explosions requires detailed knowledge of the rocks surrounding the point of explosion both before and after each test.
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, also indicate the behavior of the rocks during the explosion, that is, their response to seismic shock and extreme temperatures and pressures and the changes brought about by fusion.
Another program, also in behalf of the Atomic Energy Commission, concerns the safe disposal of radioactive wastes.
It includes studies of deep basins containing sedimentary rocks that might be suitable for underground storage of liquid wastes, as well as studies of specific minerals such as vermiculite and montmorillonite that by ion exchange, sorption, or other processes, will retain caesium, strontium, or other high-level waste products with safety.
As a precautionary measure, the nautral background radioactivity has been determined for many areas being considered for installation of nuclear facilities.
This information will be used to detect significant changes in radiation levels.
The relationship of human health and geology are receiving expanded study.
Previously, medical research has related certain physiological effects to the presence or absence of such elements as iodine, selenium, and fluorine, but few geologic studies were specifically aimed at analyzing the available geologic data to compare with health studies.
During the past year, a map was prepared to show the maximum reported fluorine content of ground water in each county in the United States.
A joint study with the National Cancer Institute and the Washington County, Maryland, Health Department is appraising the geological environment of that county to provide detailed data on distribution of natural radioactivity and any unusual distribution of elements.
An interesting byproduct of the development of an extrasensitive device to measure magnetic susceptibility of rocks has been the discovery of a measurable difference between cancerous and noncancerous tissue both from animals and humans, apparently due to a depletion of iron in the former.
The prolonged and intense volcanic activity at Kilauea from November through February was extensively studied and every phase carefully recorded by the Survey's Volcano Observatory staff.
Effeetive use of newly developed portable tiltmeters and of seismographs permitted early warnings to be issued, so that no loss of life occurred.
Better understanding of future volcanic activity is possible as a result of the thorough and continuing study of all phases of eruptivity.
Radioactive materials.
Detailed studies of uranium deposits at Ambrosia Lake, N. Mex.
Gila County, Ariz., in several basins in Wyoming, in the Southern Black Hills, S. Dak., and at Palangana salt dome in Texas, are developing specific information on' the local conditions that prevailed during ore deposition and defining favorable areas for further exploration.
Studies of uranium occurrence in coal in the Cave Hills area and other areas of northwestern South Dakota and other coals in Montana, North Dakota, Wyoming, Idaho, and New Mexico indicate that the uranium-bearing coals are of low rank and contain more ash than nonuraniferous coals; that they occur with rocks containing volcanic materials and that the uranium content increases towards fractures, permeable layers, or other probable ground water conduits.
These relations indicate that the uranium was leached from the voleanic materials and deposited in the coals by circulating ground waters.
The application of this theory to known stratigraphic information has been successful in the discovery of several uranium-bearing lignites, and also in indicating additional areas for exploration.
A large number of studies in progress in the United States during the past year were aimed at exploring the composition, structure, origin, and history of the rocks that form the earth's crust.
Although not specifically designed to furnish immediate solutions to economic and social questions, these studies provide the basic facts that may develop clues to the location of new sources of useful minerals, or improved utilization of the surface of the earth.
Primarily, these studies result in the preparation of geologic maps, although geophysical, geochemical, stratigraphic, and paleontologic studies are used extensively to supplement, expand, or extend the work in many areas.
This research results typically in maps of quadrangular areas bounded by lines of latitude and longitude, at scales ranging from 1: 24,000 to 1: 250,000, depending on amount of detail to be shown.
Other work includes the preparation of several kinds of geologic maps of the Nation as a whole.
One example is a paleotectonic folio of the Triassic system, describing the sequence of development of physical features of our country during this ancient time.
Work on a similar folio of the Permian system is nearly completed.
Other nationwide maps that are being prepared include collaborative work with scientifie societies in producing a new tectonic map and an absolute gravity map.
Examples of work aimed at improving our understanding of major features of the earth's crust are the studies of several major intrusive bodies including the Sierra Nevada batholith in California, the Idaho batholith, the Boulder batholith in Montana, and batholiths of the Colorado Front Range and Northern Caseade Mountains in Washington.
Currently, work is in progress from Maine to Hawaii, from northern Alaska to Puerto Rico, and in Antarctica.
Studies in the Antarctic suggest that much of Marie Byrd Land is a volcanic archipelago.
In other parts of Antarctica, additional knowledge of the geologic character of that least-known continent is slowly accumulating.
As an example of the results that can be obtained by combining geological and geophysical studies, in the Los Angeles area a detailed analysis of the density of more than 2,000 samples was required to integrate the results of geologic mapping of the surface and subsurface with gravity surveys.
As a result, a compartmentalized lithodensity model was constructed that permitted calculation of the residual regional gravity gradient.
The results of this study indicate that the crust of the earth thickens landwards.
Geophysical exploration techniques have been directed at studies of large regions to assist in determining geologic structure in areas of poor exposure and in determining the depth and configuration of basement rocks and deeply buried magnetic masses.
These studies are providing information not previously attainable by older methods.
High speed computers are routinely used to obtain quantitative interpretations of geologic mapping problems, especially in the application of aeromagnetic methods.
Recent drilling and seismic surveys at three places in Indiana have confirmed predictions of depth to Precambrian basement rocks as published in 1958.
Magnetic methods have been used to a large extent in making a recently published map of the lavered magnetic rocks in the Iron River-Crystal Falls district of Michigan.
A graphical method has been developed for determining the dip of buried geologic structures when the depth to the top of the structure is known.
Aerial radioactivity surveys have proven to be helpful in geologic mapping in some areas of poor exposure and low relief.
Small differences in content of radioactive minerals can be detected and correlated with specific rocks—for example, felsic igneous rocks and shales are generally more radioactive than mafic igneous rocks and carbonate rocks.
Electrical resistivity and induced polarization techniques have shown promising results in geologic mapping of nonconductive layers in the study of metamorphic rocks under alluvial or glacial cover.
These techniques have been tried in small areas in upper Michigan, Maine, and Virginia.
In addition, the value of induced electrical polarization studies is being demonstrated in the search for low grade metallic ores that are not sufficiently concentrated to cause other types of electrical or magnetic or gravity anomalies.
In favorable circumstances, the measuresements may be used not only to locate ore bodies but also to estimate their grade.
In addition to research stimulated by projects seeking specific economic objectives or by projects investigating specific areas, another type of research is undertaken to increase our knowledge of natural processes within the earth, and the related geologic principles.
Such research is essential to develop better geologic techniques.
These researches include studies in several fields such as paleontology, plant ecology, geomorphology, geophysics, geochemistry, mineralogy, petrology, and isotope and nuclear geology.
Studies in plant ecology and geomorphology are demonstrating systematic relationships between plant type, topographic form, soil composition and water availability.
In addition to previously wellknown associations of some plants with certain soils and parent rocks, these newer studies indicate that vegetation maps can be made to reveal origin and development of land forms.
Field studies in the Potomac River basin based on this approach have indicated that the classical concept of the origin of peneplains through eycles of erosion may not be valid.
The present landscape is considered to have formed by longcontinued erosion under conditions similar to the present.
Topical studies of the physical properties of rocks, experiments on rock deformation, and studies of past changes in the earth's magnetic field are furnishing new geophysical information.
New data on the mechanical, electrical, magnetic, optical, thermal, thermodynamic and mass properties of rocks and minerals are helping to explain many previous empirical observations.
Pioneering studies of earth mechanics and the geometry of faulting suggest that larger earth fractures and faults can be related to simple equations of plasticity.
Studies of ballistic theory, impact phenomena and data from nuclear and conventional explosions have been integrated to develop a theory of how meteor craters developed.
This has been verified in field studies at Meteor Crater, Ariz.
Results of these studies have been extrapolated for use in interpreting craters in the moon.
In this regard, a program of broad current interest in behalf of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers was directed at mapping the features of the moon.
Detailed study using photogeologic techniques resulted in distinguishing the relative age of many terrain features.
Comparison of lunar craters and some comparable earth features suggests that all the large craters and most of the others were caused by meteorite impact.
Rays extending from some of these are interpreted as the result of splashes of crushed rock ejected during crater formation.
Topical studies in mineralogy, petrology, and geochemistry include the description of new minerals, their chemical and physical properties, and how they were formed; the study and description of rocks; and the distribution and abundance of chemical elements and their isotopes in the earth's crust.
Studies of mineral composition and structure reveal conditions during natural formation of these minerals as well as suggesting ways of synthesizing them and, utlimately, how to use them.
For example, studies of beta-spodumene, a lithium silicate mineral, have shown it shrinks on heating and swells on cooling, so that it can be mixed with normal ceramic materials to mold precisely dimensioned forms that retain their exact size after firing.
Studies of the distribution of isotopes of the elements are providing clues to ancient temperatures, to the establishment of a more exact geologic time scale, and they give data on the composition and origin of ore-forming fluids.
Studies of isotopes of hydrogen have indicated usefulness in tracing oceanic currents.
For example, the waters originating in Antarctica have about 1 percent less of the heavy hydrogen isotope, deuterium, than other ocean waters contain.
In studies of liquids obtained from minute bubbles in ore minerals from fluorite deposits in Illinois, the early minerals were found to contain fluids similar to waters normally present in rocks of that locality, but the fluids from later minerals are progressively depleted in deuterium.
Analytical methods and laboratory techniques are continually being improved and new equipment is devised to provide the new kinds of data required in modern research.
New equipment developed includes an electron microprobe X-ray analyzer for use in identifying minute grains of minerals intergrown with other minerals; a heating stage for use with X-ray diffractometer; a cooling cell that extended the useful range of study of temperature effects in fluid inclusions in minerals under the microscope; a new device to convert seismic observations to numerical form for rapid coding and input into high speed computers; and the development of a low-cost instrument for beryllium exploration.
Technical assistance of the Geological Survey to foreign governments is primarily designed to aid the growth of their economies through development of their mineral resources.
This program under auspices of the International Cooperation Administration includes the training, advisory, and service functions of 47 of the Department's geologists working in cooperation with their host country counterparts in 12 nations, sharing advances in methods and techniques of geologic research and investigations; and the training in this country of some 121 earth scientists and technicians from 30 countries.
Cooperative geologic mapping or other field studies were in progress in Chile, Brazil, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Taiwan, Mexico, India, Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines, and Indonesia.
Advisory services to central government mineral agencies were an integral part of the program in several of these countries and in Bolivia and Peru.
This Division classifies Federal lands as to mineral and water resources and supervises mineral recovery under leases, permits, and licenses on Federal, Indian, and Naval petroleum reserve lands.
A headquarters staff and a field staff of geologists and engineers make surveys, maps, and reports dealing with water power, fuels, minerals, and chemicals essential to the economy of the United States; supervise mining and drilling operations to assure safe and economical production by private enterprise of coal, oil, gas, and other minerals; and supervise operations of the Federal Petroleum Board.
During fiscal year 1960 a total of 30,724 cases were processed by the Survey including 7,040 cases involving the outright disposal of Federal lands either with no reservation of minerals or with the reservation of one or more specified minerals.
In addition, 21,033 cases involving the exercise under Federal leasing laws of the Government's right to lease a mineral substance to private enterprise were handled.
Initial or revised definitions of 66 producing oil and gas fields were prepared concerning Federal lands and 358 unit-plan and participating area proposals were appraised geologically; 63 determinations were made of the productive limits of producing oil and gas deposits; the geologic significance of 248 new discoveries of oil or gas made on or affecting Federal leaseholds were reported for appropriate action; competitive sales of oil and gas leases on 29 parcels of public land were reviewed; 18 appeals from decisions of the Department's Bureau of Land Management affecting the disposal of Federal lands were reported; 198 miscellaneous reports were prepared on the mineral potentialities of specific lands for various agencies of the Federal Government.
Geologists from field offices throughout the West made investigations and produced geologic reports and maps of considerable assistance to engineers in planning development and administering Federal leases.
These studies are also valuable to others concerned with conservation, or with determining more efficient methods of recovery of leasable minerals.
Maps or reports were completed on the following fields or areas: Cumberland National Forest, Kentucky, preparatory to oil and gas leasing activity in the area; in the Florida phosphate reserve to obtain background information concerning proposed legislation for restoration of reserved mineral rights in patented lands; geologic structure map and report on the Soso oil and gas field, Miss.
Surface and subsurface studies of one section of the potash area in southeastern New Mexico; contour maps of San Juan Basin and Bisti fields, N. Mex.
Stratigraphy of the Colorado Group of the Sweetgrass Arch and Disturbed Belt, geologic report on damsites on the Lower Flathead River, contour maps of Poplar, Bredette, Outlook, and west half of Sumatra Anticline fields, Mont.
Investigations were conducted in Alaska, Colorado, Oregon, Washington, and Montana during the year to determine the waterpower and storage possibilities of streams and lakes on public lands.
Eighteen sets of maps were published covering 307 miles of stream channel and 26 damsites; six sets totaling 95 miles of stream channel and 8 damsites were ready to submit for publication, and eight sets covering about 200 miles of stream channel were in various stages of preparation.
A report on the waterpower potential of streams along the Alaska mainland between Thomas Bay near Petersburg and Juneau was submitted for publication as a water-supply paper.
A report on Bradley Lake was completed and is being reviewed for publication.
Reports on Nellie Juan Lake and Snow River on the Kenai Peninsula and on five lakes on Baranof Island, Alaska, and Trask River, Oreg.
A report on the Nehalem River, Oreg.
Work was continued on the program for making a systematic review of waterpower withdrawals.
Lands withdrawn in powersite reserves total 7,205,637 acres, and in reservoir site reserves 131,593 acres.
Two hundred and forty reports were prepared and submitted to the Department's Bureau of Land Management on the waterpower value of lands affected in applications for rights-of-way, and 7,300 reports on applications for land acquisition.
Thirty reports were submitted on applications to the Federal Power Commission for permit or license, and 65 on applications for restoration of lands in powersite withdrawals.
Supervisory control is exercised by the Survey over mining activities concerned with prospecting, development and production of minerals under permits and leases on public, Indian, and acquired lands.
Permits and leases issued under applicable laws and regulations involve operations for coal, potassium, sodium, and phosphate on public lands and such metals and minerals as copper, iron, lead, manganese, nickel, tungsten, uranium, vanadium, zinc, asbestos, barite, bentonite, clay, coal, garnet, gypsum, feldspar, fluorspar, limestone, mica, peat, phosphate, pumice, quartzite, quartz crystal, sand and gravel, stone, and vermiculite on Indian and acquired lands.
Mining supervision includes responsibility for investigating and reporting on applications for leases and prospecting permits; recommending lease terms, enforcing compliance with lease terms and regulations governing the conduct of prospecting, mining, and milling operations; and determining royalty liability of lessees, maintaining accounts, preparing statements and receiving payment of royalties and rentals.
As of June 30, 1960, there were under supervision 3,857 properties involved in leases, permits, and licenses in 32 States, of which 2,738 were on public land, 319 .
Survey petroleum engineer, accompanied by operator's representative, checking temperature and volume of butane going from lease to storage.
On-site inspections assure resource conservation and protection of the Government's royalty interest.
Production from such lands during the fiscal year is estimated at 25,974,928 tons, valued at $165,065,401 with royalties amounting to $7,718,076.
In order of magnitude and value, potash ranked first with 13,041,547 tons at $76,328,418 followed by coal, 5,433,342 tons at $33,914,541; phosphate, 2,180,183 tons at $5,281,675; and sodium, 1,012,694 tons at $25,532,781.
Other production in substantial quantity includes uranium, 1,371,757 tons at $20,316,485 and sand and gravel, 2,057,986 tons at $1,694,247.
Of particular interest during the year was the delineation of a mineable potash deposit on the Cane Creek Anticline southwest of Moab, Utah, and indicated southeast extension of that deposit into the nearby Lisbon Valley revealed by prospecting on permit land.
Intensified prospecting in the Green River area, Wyoming, diselosed extension of known deposits of the sodium mineral, trona, resulting in extension of the defined leasable area.
Several of the major mining companies are continuing exploration activities in southeast Missouri which has resulted in valuable discoveries of lead and zine in the sediments and prospectively valuable discoveries of copper and iron in the basement rocks.
Further, a modern mill near Viburnum with an initial capacity of 3,000 tons per day and a potential capacity of 6,000 tons per day was put into operation to process the new production.
Supervision of oil and gas activities includes operations for the discovery, development, and production of crude oil, natural gas and products extracted from natural gas, on Federal, Indian, and certain Naval petroleum reserve lands.
Unitization activities of oil and gas operations involving public and acquired land were reflected in the approval of 94 new unit plans during the year and the termination of 49 previously approved unit plans, leaving 420 approved plans covering 7,923,103 acres outstanding.
On the outer Continental Shelf 4 such plans were approved and 1 was terminated.
The total now stands at 15, embracing 375,800 acres.
About 60 percent of the petroleum, 40 percent of the natural gas, and 71 percent of the gasoline and liquified petroleum gases obtained from Federal lands during the year was produced under approved plans of unit operation.
On Indian lands 11 new units were approved and 1 was terminated, the total number of plans in effect at the end of the year being 60, involving 121,887 acres.
There were 147 drilling units, or communitization agreements approved during the year and 2 terminated making a total of 1,021 outstanding as of June 30.
There were three development contracts approved during the year and none terminated.
The total number of such approved contracts outstanding on June 30 was 14 involving 4,644,830 acres.
The Connally Act of February 22, 1935, supports conservation activities of oil-producing States by prohibiting interstate shipment of oil produced in violation of certain State oil and gas conservation laws.
The act is administered by the Federal Petroleum Board under supervision and direction of the Geological Survey.
While the Connally Act is applicable wherever State laws limit the rate of production and prescribe conditions for producing and handling oil, its chief application is in 106 counties of Texas, Lea and Eddy Counties in New Mexico, and all of Louisiana.
The Board also enforces provisions of the act in Mississippi, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Kansas, and other oil-producing States.
Unless exempted by the Board in writing and by notice, producers within the above designated areas are required to maintain daily production records and file monthly production reports of operations on each lease in the oilfield.
Transporters and refiners are also required to file monthly reports.
Leases inspected number 4,645, those visited 1,185, and 50 pipelines were checked, involving the visiting of 411 oilfields and the conducting of 1,551 interviews.
Twelve violations of the Connally Act were detected.
There were 17 cases of alleged violation of the act on the docket of the Board when the fiscal year began and three new investigations were started.
Seven cases were closed by court action, resulting in fines of $52,900.
Another primary responsibility of the Geological Survey is to provide basic facts on the occurrence of water, its quantity and quality, and the manner of its use.
Such data are needed to aid in solving the Nation's mounting water difficulties.
Increasing requirements for water have created many new problems and intensified some of those that have plagued the Nation in the past.
1. Impact of a growing and shifting population on water supplies, accompanied by an accelerated increase in water requirements for industry and agriculture.
2. Limitations on water development and use brought about by radioactive and chemical waste disposal from municipalities, industries, and agriculture.
3. Effects of land use practices and urban development upon existing water supplies.
4. Water losses through evaporation and inability to capture surplus runoff for later use.
5. Contamination of fresh water supplies by salt water intrusion in adjacent coastal and inland areas.
6. The need to determine sources, character, and potential of water of marginal purity that might be suitable for upgrading through saline water conversion methods.
7. Legal questions arising out of laws on water rights, flood zoning and insurance, or compacts between States.
8. Floods and the need for adequate design and operation of floodcontrol structures, forecasting flood stages and volumes, and enactment of flood zoning and insurance regulations.
The Survey's water-resources investigations include systematic collection, analysis, interpretation, and publication of hydrologic and related data; appraisal of water resources of specific areas; study of water requirements for industrial, domestic, and agricultural uses; and research and development to improve the scientific basis and techniques of investigations.
The results appear as scientific or technical reports and papers.
Recognizing that the usefulness of water-resources investigations depends largely on availability of reports that meet the variety of needs for water information, the timely production of reports is being emphasized.
During fiscal year 1960, the Survey published 89 water supply papers, 21 circulars, 14 professional papers, and 6 bulletins concerning water.
In addition, 51 reports on water were made available for public reference, and 334 manuscripts were approved for publication as cooperative State reports and as abstracts and articles in scientific journals.
Six water reports were prepared for the Senate Select Committee on National Water Resources, a committee established in 1959 to study the development and coordination of water resources.
In recent years, emphasis has been placed on interpretive studies to give more meaning to basic data.
Added attention is being placed on research activities as a source of new knowledge and an improved understanding of processes in the hydrologic cycle is being sought.
These efforts are resulting in inereased usefulness of the vast quantity of basic data on water that have been systematically collected for many years.
The program of water-resources investigations is a coordinated effort between Federal, State, and local agencies.
Federal-State cooperative investigations began in 1895 and this kind of work has grown steadily, now constituting about 60 percent of the total program.
Streamflow and other surface-water data were obtained at 7,200 sites distributed throughout the 50 States, Guam, Samoa; and Puerto Rico.
A special summary of all streamflow records for the period 1888-1950 is essentially complete.
Reports were published for Hudson Bay and Upper Mississippi River basins, Missouri River basin above Sioux City, the Central Valley, and Pacific slope basins in California.
Flood-frequency analyses, parts of a nationwide study, were completed for Pacific slope basins in Washington and upper Columbia River basin, Snake River basin, and Pacific slope basins in Oregon and lower Columbia River basin.
Pending completion of this project preliminary statewide analyses are being conducted in cooperation with several State agencies.
Reports were made available in 1960 covering the States of Washington and Maryland.
Floods of April-June 1953 in Louisiana and Adjacent States.
Floods of January 1953 in Western Oregon and Northwestern California.
Summary of Floods in the United States During 1953.
Summary of Floods in the United States During 1954.
Floods of January–February 1959 in Ohio.
Work is in progress on several other flood reports including floods of January-February 1959 in Ohio and Indiana.
As part of a continuing program for mapping flood-inundated areas, the Survey has completed manuscripts for publication covering 12 cities in Ohio subjected to floods of January-February 1959; Calumet City, Ill., and vicinity floods of 1954 and 1957; Des Moines, Iowa, and vicinity floods of 1903, 1947, 1954, and 1960; and Boulder, Colo., and vicinity.
Soil Conservation Service.
Hydraulic data for 78 drainage-structure sites were furnished to highway departments in 14 States.
Considerable progress was made on a new manual of hydrology, which was started during the 1959 fiscal year.
Compacts for the apportionment of interstate waters usually include provision for measurement of streamflow, commonly by the Geological Survey.
Nineteen such agreements are in effect and five others are under negotiation.
Water-resources investigations were continued along the Canadian boundary, as required by the Boundary Water Treaty of January 11, 1909, between the United States and Canada, or by order of the International Joint Commission.
This program places a major emphasis on area investigations and appraisal studies supported by research and training directed toward providing a thorough knowledge of future water problems and methods by which they can be solved.
In addition to the more formal published reports released, 9,000 replies to requests for ground-water information were made by field and Washington offices.
The requests covered a wide range of needs, as follows: Industrial 21 percent, municipal 14 percent, irrigation 18 percent, private 25 percent, and other interests 22 percent.
In research, many projects are in progress which will lead to a better understanding of the ground-water environment, particularly the flow of fluids through porous media.
It is imperative that these new concepts and principles be developed to enable more accurate prediction of future ground-water trends, particularly in areas where limited supplies are being “mined“.
Studies are in progress to determine the factors and processes involved in the strain, deformation, and compaction of water-bearing rocks resulting chiefly from changes produced by withdrawal of ground water.
The studies are designed to provide knowledge concerning the storage capacity of aquifers, particularly as related to long periods of ground-water withdrawal.
The San Joaquin Valley in California, which is an area of active subsidence, is being used as a field laboratory.
As a result of widespread interest in the possible application of radioactive isotopes in hydrologic studies, a project concerned with the use of tritium in hydrologic studies was started in 1957.
The objectives are to test the value of tritium as a hydrologie tool in studies of ground-water recharge, movement, and discharge, and in quantitative evaluation through water-budget studies.
A Geological Survey ground water engineer measuring flow of water from pump discharge pipe as part of a nationwide inventory of the country's ground-water resources.
A study of voleanie terranes is now in its third year in the Pacific Northwest on the Columbia River Basalt.
A study of limestone terrane was begun in the central and southeastern United States in 1960.
Water-quality data were obtained at 907 sites in 1960.
About onethird of these river observation stations are east of the Mississippi River.
In addition to this national quality-of-water measuring network, special investigations were continued in the basins of the Colorado, Columbia, Snake, Mississippi, and other rivers.
The quality of the Nation's ground water was evaluated as part of the Survey's investigations of underground supplies.
Several other special studies also contributed to the fund of knowledge about water quality.