The Department of the Interior has the prime function of planning for the future of America and working to conserve the natural resources which sustain its life.
But because so much of what is happening inside America today is drowned out by the clamor of an embattled world, it is only recently that we have become aware of a growing internal crisis which deeply affects the lives of all Americans.
This “Quiet Crisis" concerns a battle being waged against us from within by the forces of natural progress and explosive growth.
In its wake across America this battle has left polluted rivers and lakes, disappearing open space, overcrowded parks, declining resources, the threatened extinction of certain species of our wildlife, and dwindling opportunties for the outdoor experiences which through the years have had such a profound influence in shaping the national character of America.
Never before has man been so at odds with his environment as we are in America today.
In the short span of a hundred years—the century that bridges our great westward expansion and the present day—we have created forces hostile to nature that, given full sway, could in time make us strangers in our own land.
A great poet has written of our continent: “The land was ours before we were the land's.
As we survey the developments of the past two decades, we are driven to the inescapable conviction that the land which we and our forebears knew will not be “ours" for long unless we arrest the forces that would alter and blight it and despoil its fruits.
We are seeing the face of America change.
This has been going forward rapidly, as we all know, since the end of World War II.
For example, today more than a million acres of land each year is being converted from open space into industrial and commercial developments of various kinds.
Let us look at another of the changes.
Forty years from now it is predicted that 85 percent of the people of this country will be living in urban centers.
Consider how this movement will affect, among other things, the great problem of our water needs.
We can anticipate these needs will double with our population growth in the next 20 years; they will quadruple in the next 40 years.
Already there are areas where growth has been checked because of water shortages.
Only in recent years have we realized that water is a resource with limitations.
There is the question, too, in this movement to urban centers, of how the enormously increased requirements for electric power will be met.
Here the projected growth in demand even far outstrips our future water needs.
This again indicates the crises that we face in terms of conservation.
Indeed, how our cities grow and how we use our resources will determine in the long run what kind of lives our people lead and what kind of people we are.
If we are to maintain man's proper relationship with nature, it is plain that we must broaden the role of resource planning in the management of our national affairs.
The American continent has, from the beginning, been hospitable to mankind.
Its glories and its gifts have made possible the kind of life we know in America today.
But the good earth will remain good only so long as we make it so.
Many years ago, Theodore Roosevelt summed up the challenge which we face today when he said: "To skin and exhaust the land instead of using it so as to increase its usefulness will result in undermining in the days of our children the very prosperity which we ought by right to hand down to them."
Each element of the “Quiet Crisis" in which we are now involved represents, at this stage, no more than a serious inconvenience, together with an uneasy prospect of the future.
But—taken together—they add up to a circumstance that threatens the wellsprings of our national existence.
The history of man's progress is, in large measure, the chronicle of his emotional and physical relationship with the land—and, through the land, with himself and his fellow man.
In America, we found a virgin continent with magnificent landscapes and a seemingly inexhaustible supply of natural resources.
A good many of the qualities which we ascribe to our national character—humility, the sense of fair purpose and fair play, generosity, to name a few—are based to large degree upon our finding of the bounties of this land.
But what of America in the 20th century?
How can we measure ourselves against traffic jams, blight, smog, polluted streams?
If a measurement is made, can we find ourselves otherwise than wanting in our environment of today?
At no time has a society achieved so much in the way of material progress—but at the same time allowed so many of its basic values to fall by the wayside.
And—in the strict accounting—one of the most vital of the values we have allowed to slip away is our oneness with the land—the utilization of the land’s resources to give the American people the maximum of enjoyment, understanding, and inspiration from the sites and objects inherited from our past.
Admittedly, we must move ahead with the development of our land resources.
Likewise, our technology must be refined and stimulated.
But in the long run life will succeed only in a life-giving environment.
The beauty of nature and nature's works bas always been an inspiration in American life.
The park resources of America and the responsibility for their protection and enbancement rests with the Department of the Interior as one of its greatest resource challenges of the future.
We can no longer afford unnecessary sacrifices of living space and natural landscapes.
The sad truth is that development tends to outrun planning in our society.
More often than not the wrecker's work is done before the conservationist and the planner arrive on the scene.
If we are to maintain man's proper relationship to the land, it is plain that we must insist that our developers be more conservationminded, and we must broaden the role of resource planning in the management of our national estate.
In our haste to build new factories and roads and suburbs we must take care that man's need to refresh himself in his natural environment is not foreclosed, and that our basic resources—water, timber, fuels—are not unnecessarily diminished.
President Kennedy has called for one last great effort in the 1960's to finish the conservation work begun by Theodore Roosevelt who long ago counseled Americans to “set apart forever for the use and benefit of our people as a whole rich forested lands and .
This nation," the President said, "cannot lose sight of its natural resources—its land, wood, and water—while building its military might. We hold the sword, and we are determined to maintain our strength and our commitments. But we also hold in our hands the trowel."
This spirit motivated the first major conservation accomplishment of President Kennedy's administration—the creation of a magnificent National Seashore Park on the ocean sands of Cape Cod, in an area close to major population centers of the East.
Through this action, one of the most beautiful of America's remaining unspoiled open spaces will be preserved for all time for the use and enjoyment of this and the generations to come.
But at every hand near our growing centers of population similar opportunities are slipping through our fingers.
Once land development has begun it is invariably "too late," for land prices quickly soar beyond the public purse.
What strategy, what plan of action, will save enough space for all of our people?
Leadership from our publie men is, of course, indispensable.
Federal action is needed to round out our national park and wildlife refuge systems and to develop fully the recreation and timber potential of our forestlands.
We must also have aggressive State park expansion programs to reserve new parklands before they are pre-empted.
Municipal leadership, too, is essential if we are to provide adequate city park systems and enough fringe open space to permit our cities to expand gracefully.
We also need—and here the burden falls heaviest on local leadership—creative and farsighted use of zoning regulations and land use plans to compel the speculator and developer to put people first and ensure that adequate space is allotted to playgrounds and parks.
Government can provide the main thrust, but individuals must play a creative role if we are to ensure an adequate heritage for all Americans.
If our growth in the years ahead is to leave America a better, rather than a poorer, place in which to live, we must give far more attention to our uses of land and water, forests, fish and wildlife, parks and wilderness, minerals and fuels, and we must embark, while time allows, on an active preservation of the remaining open spaces which surround our populated areas.
In the future we can live in a land which is still worthy of being called “America the Beautiful" . . . or our cities can be hemmed in by a billboard-studded wasteland running monotonously from one super-city to another.
The choice is ours—and the time to make the choice is now.
Under the vigorous leadership of the Kennedy Administration, this Department, in close collaboration with other Federal, State, and local agencies, is moving rapidly toward new horizons of resource conservation and development concerned not only with wildlife and natural resources, but with man himself.
Something will have gone out of us as a people if we ever let the last remaining wilderness be destroyed, if we permit the last of our forests to be turned into comic books and plastic cigarette cases, if we drive the few remaining members of the wild species into zoos or extinction, if we pollute the last clean air or dirty the last clean streams or push our paved roads through the last of the silence.
Not many people are likely any more to look upon what we call progress as an unmixed blessing. Just as surely as it has brought us increased comfort and more material goods, it has brought us spiritual losses and it threatens to become the Frankenstein that will destroy us."
One of the most important segments of this vigorous new program is concerned with our relationship to, and our use of land.
Action to bring about these long-needed improvements in our recreational land planning and management is well under way.
At the same time, programs are being accelerated which will result in the more productive use of our public land.
The Federal Government has responsibility for nearly 770 million acres of such land, much of it devoted to a variety of essential uses.
But, for a number of reasons, some 477 million acres of public domain lands remain vacant, unappropriated and unreserved.
Obviously, this represents a vital national reserve that should be devoted to productive use now and maintained for future generations.
Today in the United States we are using more than 300 billion gallons of water a day.
By 1980, we will need 600 billion gallons a day.
This is going to be one of our most critical problems in the years ahead.
Water problems in one form or another touch all 50 States of the Union.
In some areas it is a problem of availability, in others of salinity or quality; it may be a problem of maldistribution or in some cases a problem of excess.
Regardless of the cause, as a Nation, we can no longer regard with parochial indifference the increasing imbalance between the supply and the demand for water in the United States.
At the same time, our available water supply must be used to give maximum benefits for all purposes—hydroelectric power, irrigation and reclamation, navigation, recreation, health, home and industry.
If all areas of the country are to enjoy a balanced growth, our Federal Reclamation and other water resource programs will have to give increased attention to municipal and industrial water and power supplies as well às irrigation and land redemption.
This Department, with the full cooperation and support of President Kennedy, is taking steps to speed the development of a balanced program to meet our water needs.
Already, as another major conservation achievement of this Administration, approval of the Congress has been won for pollution control legislation.
This comes at a time when pollution of our country's rivers and streams has—as a result of our rapid population and industrial growth and change—reached alarming proportions.
To meet all needs—domestic, agricultural, industrial, recreational—we shall have to use and re-use the same water, maintaining quality as well as quantity.
In many areas of the country we need new sources of supply—but in all areas we must protect the supplies we have.
The newly enacted pollution control legislation will, in the years to come, help make this possible.
At the same time, in an equally important action, the Congress authorized a $75 million program which enables the Department to greatly accelerate its work toward development of the best and most economical processes and methods for converting saline and brackish water into water suitable for beneficial consumptive purposes.
The Act instructed the Secretary of the Interior to place emphasis on the conduct, encouragement, and promotion of fundamental scientific research and basic studies looking toward solutions of saline water conversion problems.
To this end, at President Kennedy's request, a panel of his Science Advisory Committee has been working with the Department to assure the most vigorous and effective research and development program possible in this field.
An example of the progress now being made in this vital area may be seen in the fact that in June 1961 President Kennedy pressed a button at his desk in the White House which set the machinery in motion—across the nation at Freeport, Texas—of the first saline water demonstration plant constructed by the Federal Government in cooperation with private industry—a million-gallon-a-day plant that is already in the Freeport municipal water system.
Within months, dedication ceremonies were held marking completion of construction of a 250,000-gallon-a-day plant to demineralize the brackish well water at Webster, S. Dak., and construction was nearing completion on a second million-gallon-a-day sea water conversion plant at San Diego, Calif.
Building of two additional plants in New Mexico and North Carolina is scheduled to begin in the coming fiscal year.
Strengthening of still another vital water resource program—that dealing with oceanography—was assured during the year with the appointment of the noted scientist, Dr. Roger Revelle, as Science Advisory to the Secretary of the Interior.
Serving as the first science advisor in the history of the Department, Dr. Revelle is on leave of absence from his post as director of the University of California's Seripps Institution of Oceanography.
For the past several years, he has also been dean of the University's School of Science and Engineering at La Jolla, and, in addition to his contribution to the Department's work in oceanography, he will advise on and coordinate the numerous programs in other scientific fields.
To keep pace with the growth of our economy and national defense requirements, expansion of this nation's power facilities will require intensive effort by all segments of our power industry.
Through 1980, according to present estimates of the Federal Power Commission, total installed capacity should triple if we are to meet our nation's need for essential economie growth.
Sustained heavy expansion by all power suppliers—public, cooperative, and private—is clearly needed.
The role of the Federal Government is supplying an important segment of this power is now long established and must continue .
Hydroelectric sites remaining in this country will be utilized and hydroelectric power will be incorporated in all multiple-purpose river projects where optimum economic use of the water justifies such action."
A night scene at Grand Coulee Dam symbolizes the bydroelectric challenges faced by the Nation today.
With three times as much power considered necessary in 20 years, the full hydroelectric potential of the Nation will play an important part in meeting these needs.
At the same time, the President directed the Secretary of the Interior to develop plans for the early interconnection of areas served by the Department's marketing agencies with adequate common carrier transmission lines; to plan for further national cooperative pooling of electric power, both public and private; and to enlarge such pooling as now exists.
In an initial move to comply with this directive, the Department established a special task force to study the feasibility of interconnecting the lines of the Bonneville Power Administration in the Pacific Northwest and those of the Central Valley Project in California.
Realizing the need to improve the existing transmission system, both public and private, the Department appointed a committee to begin studying possibilities of standardizing equipment in operations of an extra high voltage system.
It invited private power interests to name a comparable committee to cooperate in an initial effort to standardize voltages looking toward eventual construction of a common carrier power grid.
An encouraging development resulting from this action came in September when the Edison Electric Institute outlined plans for a 10- year program of transmission line construction which could well open the way for a major cooperative planning effort of inter-connecting and pooling facilities of public systems with those of private industry.
I am encouraged to learn of these new plans for pooling and interconnection of the Nation's power company systems.
Since President Kennedy issued his message on natural resources in February of this year, there has been an increasing awareness on the part of the entire utility industry of the need to make optimum use of the Nation's electric power facilities.
It is timely that both public and private sectors of the power field are looking beyond mere interconnection of lines and are considering the mutual advantages of extra-high voltage transmission.
Many countries in western Europe have already proved the mutual benefits attainable by such cooperation.
The logical next step is a cooperative industry-governmental effort to plan for the full utilization of the present and future facilities of private industry, consumer-owned utilities, and the Federal Government.
These public agencies represent nearly 25 percent of the Nation's electric power industry.
Such a move would be in the interest of sound, complete, overall planning.
Wherever practicable, these major lines should be operated on a common carrier basis.
Meanwhile, the Congress approved-construction on an all-Federal basis of the backbone transmission lines required to market the power generated by the giant five-State Colorado River Storage Project, and steps were immediately taken to expedite planning and progress toward completion of the undertaking.
Simultaneously, the Department urged public agencies and private power companies to cooperate with it in working out a transmission system beyond the basic backbone system that will ensure the economic growth of the Colorado Basin, and promote the stability of the entire power industry.
A first step was taken toward the development of a striking new conservation tool for our electric power resources with the undertaking of studies looking toward so-called"pump-back" storage systems which permit the use of generation capacity during slack demand periods to build power reservoirs which can be pumped back into use at peak periods of power use.
These, then, are a few examples of how the Department of the Interior is moving as speedily as possible to develop our national resources for tomorrow.
There are many others.
For instance, new trails are being blazed for the American Indian through implementation of a Kennedy Administration task force report calling for greater emphasis on Indian education and the wider use and development of natural resources on the reservations.
In Reclamation, work is under way to schedule a progressive, orderly program of starting new projects to meet accumulated demands.
Similar actions are under way in regard to the conservation and development of our minerals, our fuels, our helium resources, our forests, and our wildlife.
In the following pages, all of these vital programs will be discussed in detail, and the progress shown.
From its earliest days as the “housekeeping" agency of the Federal Government and through the period when it played an important role in the winning of the West, this Department has, in effect, become the “Department of the Future."
Its responsibilities in regard to natural resources have become not only national but international in scope.
The Department—at this challenging period in its existence—recognizes that the demands of a growing industrial society at home, as well as the nation's commitments to defend freedom abroad, presents it with the most serious resource demands.
Whether our physical and spiritual resources prove adequate to meet our needs tomorrow will be determined by the decisions we make—or fail to make—today.
This is the moment of decision in resource conservation.
Our actions toward this goal during the challenging 1960's will determine the character—and the achievements—of this nation for many years to come.
Under Theodore Roosevelt, a million and a half acres of outdoor wilderness was added to our national park system.
Woodrow Wilson's administration provided a record 5.3 million acres of this precious resource, and under Franklin D. Roosevelt, the nation was enriched by an addition of another 3.5 million acres in our national parks.
But from the end of World War II until the start of President Kennedy's administration, America has added but 93,000 acres to its system of national parks.
During this period we as a people have failed to keep our trust for the future—failed to act with the traditional conviction and knowledge that America's strength flows from its streams, its mountains, its forests—from the land itself.
The majesty and wilderness of Cape Cod has successfully been preserved for public use by present and future generations through dynamic action to create a series of new National Seashores.
The cumulative effect of this neglect on the tomorrows to come may be seen in the fact that population projections indicate that in the next four decades the demand for municipal parks and playgrounds will increase 4 times, the demand for State and county recreation centers will increase 16 times, and the need for wilderness and seashore parks will be 40 times greater than it is today.
For nearly a score of years, the growing current needs for outdoor recreational space and facilities have, on a national basis, been largely neglected or ignored—to say nothing of the total inadequacy of planning for the far greater requirements of the future.
Today, we are losing a million acres of open space each year to various kinds of developments.
Obviously, the trend from open space to“asphalt jungle" cannot be allowed to continue at this pace.
In 1961, the Department of the Interior acted with all possible speed and vigor to respond to President Kennedy's call for “one last great effort" to round out the conservation programs given their start under Theodore Roosevelt.
In less than a year, a new seashore area has been added to our national parks system; a wetlands acquisition act is offering new protection to our waterfowl; expanded programs are under way in soil conservation, resource management and land use; and, by administrative order, millions of acres of public lands have been made available at low cost for park and recreational—as well as educational—purposes.
The Department's National Park Service increased its efforts during the year to preserve, while there is yet time, such outstanding and spectacular areas as: Padre Island, Tex.
Point Reyes, Calif.
Oregon Dunes, Oreg.
At the same time, the Department also was giving increased attention to the need for recreation areas readily accessible to centers of population in the East.
Among such areas under consideration are the Allagash country in Maine; Tocks Island in Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York; and Between-the-Rivers in Kentucky and Tennessee.
In the West and Midwest, efforts are going forward for new parks and recreation areas such as the Canyonlands of Utah; the Great Basin of Nevada; Rainbow Bridge of Arizona and Utah; Jemez-Bandelier in New Mexico; the Ozarks River in Missouri; and a Prairie National Park in Kansas.
This generation in the coming decades has a "last-chance" opportunity to save perhaps 15 or 20 million acres for national parks, another 2.5 million acres for national recreational areas, more than a million acres for national parkways and scenic roads, and 4.5 million acres for wildlife refuge areas.
The program even if spread out over the next few decades will be costly, but the costs will rise with each year of delay.
To help meet these costs—and to speed the program of land acquisition—the Department has proposed legislation to permit some Federal funding device specifically earmarked for this purpose; not for national park and recreation areas alone, but for State and local use as well.
This would form the basis for a nationwide Federal grantsin-aid program that would be available to all levels of government on a matching basis for the acquisition of“open spaces.
Quite recently, a number of our States have shown indications of their growing awareness of the "Quiet Crisis" in the field of outdoor recreation.
Ten years ago, the States were spending only $10 million annually on parks and recreational areas.
In 1960, the figure rose to $87 million, and in the calendar year 1961 it is expected to total an investment of some $110 million in the preservation and maintenance of mountain, seashore, lake, and river park areas.
In these programs, a variety of financing methods are being used.
Minnesota is earmarking gasoline taxes for park land acquisition and development.
Wisconsin is financing its future parks from a 1 cent tax on cigarettes.
Missouri uses a portion of property taxes.
A $75 million bond issue in New York provides $20 million for State parks and $40 million for grants to counties and municipalities on a 75 percent State and 25 percent local matching basis.
Michigan's $10 million park acquisition and development bond issue will be retired by a $2 annual sticker fee and a single 50-cent admission charge.
Legislation providing multi-million dollar bond issues for park and conservation purposes has been passed from New Hampshire to California, ineluding New Jersey's aptly-named $60 million “Green Acres Bond Act of 1961.”
Actually, as President Kennedy has said, what is required is a pooling of funds and effort by local, State and Federal governments if present and future recreational needs are to be met.
In recognition of this fact, the National Conference on State Parks, the American Institute of Park Executives, and other groups and organizations are cooperating with the Department in the organization of a new program known as Parks for America.
Parks for America represents a concerted national effort to seek authority and money to bid successfully in the competitive land market while suitable parklands are still available, and to defend existing parks against the threatened encroachment of commercial development.
At the close of the fiscal year, the new program was gaining considerable momentum across the country.
At the same time, as an integral part of Mission 66, the Department's National Park Service is preparing a nationwide plan for parks, parkways, and recreation areas to be published early in 1962, outlining a program that would provide all segments of our present and future population with adequate and readily available outdoor recreation areas.
In the studies leading to the plan, the Service is working closely with the President's Outdoor Recreation Resources Review Commission.
The report will present a list of specific potential sites as well as recommended sites for consideration as parks, parkways and recreation areas of local, State and national significance in each of the 50 States.
Following its publication, the National Park Service expects to cooperate with the States in the preparation of State recreational plans.
The Department of the Interior has long been concerned about our vanishing shoreline—the rapid movement of coastal lands into uses which deny public enjoyment and appreciation.
Water is one of the major recreation attractions in the United States—a lake for boating, fishing, swimming, or for a scenie setting for a family picnic or campsite—and today the man-made reservoir lakes of the Department's Bureau of Reclamation are in a sense creating a new and growing inland shoreline, one which now totals more than 7,000 miles devoted to public use.
The scope of this development may be brought into clearer perspective when it is considered that in California three projects alone Shasta, Trinity and Whiskeytown Lake—are creating some 520 miles of shoreline, more than the straightline distance between New York City and Detroit, Michigan, in the Middle West.
Some idea of America's appreeiation of this major new recreational resource may be seen in the fact that, in 1960, nearly 25 million visits were recorded at 177 Bureau of Reclamation recreational areas, and this figure was considerably exceeded in calendar year 1961.
To provide still further recreational resources, the Department during the year inaugurated an intensive program for expanded recreational use of public lands.
In the past, a stumbling block in the progress of State and local programs was their inability to finance expensive land acquisition.
To remedy this, the Department introduced a new pricing schedule for the sale to State and local governments of public lands expressly for outdoor recreation.
Such tracts and areas can now be purchased from the Department's Bureau of Land Management for $2.50 an acre.
Leases are 25 cents an acre per year.
But the lands must be dedicated to outdoor recreation for the public use of all Americans as a condition to their acquisition from the Federal Government.
As an additional stimulus, Congress has raised the total acreage that a State can acquire annually from the Government for use as parks.
The limit of 640 acres per year has been raised to 6,400 acres per year and temporarily lifted to 12,800, with a minimum of six sites, for 1961 and 1962.
A unique action affecting the use and management of public land was taken early in 1961 with the formal designation by the Secretary of the Interior of a 92-square-mile Federal-State cooperative land and wildlife management area in south-central California.
The area—lying about halfway between Los Angeles and San Francisco—has been designated the Caliente National Land and Wildlife Management Area.
Representing the first formal Federal-State land and wildlife area in the United States, it will consist of nearly 60,000 acres of public lands administered by the Department's Bureau of Land Management in cooperation with the Fish and Wildlife Service and the State of California.
Through a cooperative program, the Department and the State will develop the wildlife, recreational and other natural resources of the land.
Following this initial move in the inauguration of a new type of public land management program, the Department during the fiscal year had under consideration 25 similar proposals covering approximately 850,000 acres in California.
Many of the Indian reservations, because of their size and geographic location, offer outstanding possibilities for recreational developments.
Major types of recreational potentialities include camping, boating, hunting, fishing, and all types of water and winter sports.
The geographic range includes the semitropical environment of the Seminole reservations in southern Florida, the desert landscape of the Papago Reservation in Arizona, and the alpine areas on the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming.
It also encompasses the vast and colorful semidesert areas on the Navajo Reservation and numerous wilderness and scenic areas on reservations in Arizona, Oregon, Washington, Wyoming, and other States.
In the past, only limited progress has been made in developing these recreational resources.
Outstanding examples are the tribally developed Monument Valley tourist enterprise on the Navajo Reservation in northern Arizona, and the fishing, hunting, and camping facilities that have been made available for public use on the Fort Apache Reservation in the east-central portion of the same State.
During 1961, however, there was evidence of rapidly growing tribal awareness of the benefits to be realized from such developments.
At the close of the fiscal year, several additional tribes had plans in preparation, or under consideration by the Department, for the development of recreational facilities.
Unquestionably, in the years ahead, the Indian reservations will play a steadily widening and growingly fruitful role in meeting the nation's recreational needs.
Wildlife plays a unique role in America's outdoor recreational activities.
For this, if for no other reason, it is a resource we have a responsibility to pass on to those who follow us.
But our wildlife, too, is facing its own "Quiet Crisis."
Large numbers of species can be maintained only if there are large areas of the habitat they require.
For example, wetlands are a vital requirement of many forms of wildlife.
Great flights of waterfowl are just some of the creatures which need these areas.
A wetland inventory published during the vear by the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service listed 38 game and furbearing species reported by the various States as making use of one or more of the 20 types of wetlands.
Yet drainage and destruction over the years has taken a heavy and evergrowing toll.
The Department is moving ahead on a wetlands acquisition program to guarantee the existence of a network of key areas required to maintain a large population of waterfowl.
At present, there are about 3.5 million acres of land in Federal refuges and about 2 million acres have been acquired by the States.
It is estimated that at least another 7 million acres are required in public control.
The Department's Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife has worked closely with the four Flyway Councils—which represent the States—on acquisition plans, setting up priorities and making decisions as to who will buy which areas with Federal and State funds.
These plans will be reviewed annually to keep them up to date.
Currently, it is planned that the Federal Government will acquire 4.5 million acres and the remaining 2.5 million will be purchased by the States.
Federal wetland acquisitions are financed from the revenues from annual sales of duck stamps.
With receipts expected to average $5 million to $6 million a year and the cost of the 4.5 million acres for Federal acquisition estimated at $227 million, simple arithmetic clearly shows that acquisition under this arrangement would require from 38 to 45 years—provided the land were still available and there was no increase in land prices.
To meet this problem, the Congress—in one of its major conservation actions of 1961—approved a Departmental proposal that it be allowed to“borrow" funds against future duck stamp revenue to speed up wetlands purchase.
With a 7-year advance of $105,000,000 under this program, the Department of the Interior will be enabled to make a major contribution to the preservation of wildlife as a recreational resource for tomorrow.
Marine sport fishing—the “Growing Giant"—is becoming "big" not only from the standpoint of the number of anglers it is attracting, but also because of the large number of industries—boats, motors, fuels, food, tackle, housing, charters, and numerous other services it supports.
Today marine sport fishermen catch half a billion pounds of fish a year—and spend more than half a billion dollars doing it.
Obviously, this is not only a form of outdoor recreation available for everyone—but also an economic resource of considerable importance to the national economy.
As our human population expands, future added needs in recreational angling will be largely met in two areas—from salt water species along our coasts and through improved management of the reservoirs now existing and to be created.
In the Department of the Interior, we have launched an expanding program of salt water sport fishery research, and we are developing plans for similar comprehensive research into reservoir fishery management.
Through these and other research and action programs, the Department is moving to assure “fish for the future" as a part of the general conservation and expansion of our recreational resources which President Kennedy has listed as among the vital needs of our national strength and vitality in the years to come.
Unless ways are found to save more fresh water and to convert salt water cheaply into fresh, the United States only 20 years from now will lack enough water to meet its needs.
In 1961, the need was emphasized when drought laid a searing hand across the upper plains area from nothern Wyoming to Canada, while maintaining a 3-year reign over the thirsty lands of the Southwest.
It was further underscored when, early in the year, the Senate Select Committee on National Water Resources published its report on an intensive 2-year water study in which the Department of the Interior and other agencies participated.
The committee found evidences of already substantial areas of water shortage in many of the river basins in the western half of the United States.
Its water supply-demand studies showed that full development of all available water resources in five regions of the West will be required by 1980 or earlier if the needs of the growing population are to be met and the projected expansion of economic activity achieved.
The report also estimated that by the year 2000, three other regions—including one area east of the Mississippi—will be added to the list of those in which full development of available water resources will be required if the projected demands are to be met.
In his precedent-setting special message on natural resources early in his new Administration, delivered in February long before the 1961 drought impact was fülly apparent, President Kennedy expressed concern lest more immediately recognized problems compete adversely with the long-range challenge of water resource development.
The problems of immediacy," he said, "always have the advantage of attracting notice—those that lie in the future fare poorly in the competition for attention and money.
Under the circumstances, he called for the fullest participation and cooperation of Federal, State, and local governments and private interests in wisely and effectively facing up to our natural resource problems—and in particular, those concerning our water supplies.
The task is large.
The Senate Select Committee estimated that the minimum requirement for dealing with the water supply and pollution abatement problems would involve the need for 315 million acre-feet of reservior capacity for river regulation by 1980, and an additional 127 million acre-feet between 1980 and the year 2000.
This 40-year estimate of minimum, nationwide storage needs is roughly five times the total water storage capacity built by the Department's Bureau of Reclamation in the 58 years between 1902 and 1960.
The capital costs appear large, too, if the offsetting benefits are considered separately.
Municipal and industrial sewage treatment works under the same program, which calls for water of relatively high quality in all the nation's streams, would require new investments estimated at $42.2 billion by 1980, and an additional $39.4 billion between 1980 and the year 2000, for a grand total of $81.6 billion.
Required capital investments, therefore, for a minimum program of additional water storage and water pollution control facilities between now and 1980 amount to roughly $3 billion annually, considerably more than is being invested today, even under the accelerated Kennedy Administration program for the fiseal year 1961.
1. Budgetary requests were initated to provide funds in both fiscal years 1961 and 1962 to accelerate project planning and development, to expedite construction of starts on new, needed water resource projects.
2. Steps were taken to increase both the emphasis on and activity in engineering research, especially that associated with reducing loss of valuable water resulting from waste by evaporation, by transpiration of water—"stealing" weeds and trees, and by seepage losses and other wasteful irrigation practices.
3. Efforts were launched on a broad legislative front to authorize new water resource projects and to spell out new water policy, including an Administration proposal to create a Water Resources Council in the Executive Branch, to prescribe comprehensive planning on a river-basin basis, and to provide grants-in-aid for expanded planning by the respective States.
Complex water resource facilities cannot be built in a day, or a year, and sometimes not even in decades.
But at midyear, concrete results already were apparent in the Kennedy Administration's evolving water resource development program.
The 1961 drought and Administration spokesmen were making water resource development a matter of immediacy.
Fiscal year 1961 funds for the Department's Bureau of Reclamation were reprogrammed to provide, within the Congressionallyapproved appropriations, additional planning and construction work on needed projects.
This rescheduling permitted initiation of design and specification work leading toward a new construction start on the Red Bluff Diversion Dam, first step toward supplying water for the Tehama-Colusa Canal of the Sacramento Canals unit, Central Valley Project in California, and initiation of advance planning on the Wichita Project in Kansas.
The latter is an $18.2 million project to furnish urgently needed supplemental municipal and industrial water supplies to the city of Wichita.
Mid-March revisions in the 1962 budget also resulted in appropriations requests for $900,000 for stepping up project investigations throughout the 17 Western States; funds to accelerate the $96 million Canadian River Project to deliver supplementary water to 11 municipalities in Texas; for moving ahead by two years the delivery of water to the 33,960-acre Ainsworth Unit in Nebraska; for expediting construction of transmission lines in three major river-basin systems, and for other purposes.
In mid-February, design and specifications staffs of the Bureau of Reclamation's Denver Engineering Center went on a 6-day, 58-hour week to speed up contract awards.
First water deliveries were made this spring from the Corning Canal of the Central Valley Project to water users in southern Tehama County in California, and from the new Southside Canal on the 22,000-acre Collbran project in western Colorado.
The greatest emphasis to Administration efforts to meet the water challenge and provide sufficient resources for tomorrow came in mid-July when President Kennedy delivered to the Congress his proposed “Water Resources Planning Act of 1961," the most far-reaching water policy legislation sent to the Congress by the White House in many years.
2. Authorize the President to create, at the request of the Governor of one or more affected States or of the Council, a river basin water resources commission for any region, major river basin, or group of related river basins in the United States.
These commissions, composed of representatives of the States and Federal agencies concerned, would be charged with preparing and keeping up to date comprehensive, integrated plans for Federal, State and local development of water and related land resources.
3. Provide encouragement to the States to fully and effectively participate in water and related land resource planning through financial assistance to aid in their planning.
This river basin planning would require that any plan take into account domestic, agricultural, energy, industrial, recreational, fish and wildlife.
It would enable the Congress—within the Federal sphere of responsibility—to decide upon the many individual project developments on the basis of full information as to the overall needs and timing for basin development.
States and local interests—within their respective spheres of responsibility—would be enabled to do likewise.
We have a national obligation to manage our basic water supply so it will be available when and where needed and in acceptable quality and quantity—and we have no time to lose," President Kennedy wrote the Congress.
The planning authorized by this legislation will provide a vital tool for achieving effective water resources management."
On June 26, President Kennedy acted to attack the water problem on another front when he forwarded to Congress proposed legislation to expand and extend Federal efforts in the saline water conversion program.
This bill," the President stated in a letter of transmittal,"will provide the Department of the Interior with a wide variety of tools to attack the saline water conversion cost barrier.
It contemplates a major acceleration of current programs of basic and applied research, and permits the construction of conversion plants far larger than any now in existence to test the feasibility of known and yet to be developed processes.
In September, the Congress responded by passing Public Law 87–295 which authorizes the expanded program and provides for an appropriation of $75 million to achieve its aims.
In mid-1961, President Kennedy participated in cermonies marking the dedication of the nation's first saline water conversion demonstration plant at Freeport, Tex.
This is a work," he said at that time, "which in many ways is more important than any other scientific enterprise in which this country is now engaged.
It serves the interest of men and women everywhere.
It can do more to raise men and women from lives of poverty and desperation than any other scientific advance.
As recently as the late 1930's, it cost between $4 and $5 to convert a thousand gallons of sea water into fresh.
Since then, equipment, fuel, and labor costs have increased several fold.
Despite these increases, cost of the Freeport product water is presently estimated at $1–$1.25 per 1,000 gallons, including 20-year amortization charges.
Thus it can be seen that important gains are being made in reducing costs.
With improved techniques, more experience, and larger plants, it is aniticipated that conversion costs—in the foreseeable future— can be still further reduced to somewhere in the neighborhood of 60 cents per 1,000 gallons.
In addition to the Freeport plant, four other sites have been selected for demonstration plant testing.
They are at San Diego, Calif.
Webster, S. Dak.
Roswell, N. Mex.
During the year, a second plant was completed and dedicated—the 250,000-gallon-a-day facility to desalt brackish well water at Webster, S. Dak.
At the same time, contracts had been let for design of the New Mexico and North Carolina plants, with work on this construction scheduled to start in the new fiscal year.
Throughout the vear, a steady flow of legislative reports to the 87th Congress gave the Department of the Interior's endorsement to proposed legislation to authorize additional water resource development projects for the West.
The $135 million Navaio Indian irrigation project and the $86 million initial stage of the San Juan-Chama project in New Mexico and Colorado, to supply new and supplemental water to a total of 231,530 acres of land in the Southwest, including extensive Indian reservation acreage.
The $170 million Fryingpan-Arkansas project to provide supplemental irrigation water to 280,000 acres in Colorado's Arkansas River Valley, and other multipurpose benefits.
The $81.5 million mid-State multipurpose Reclamation project to deliver water to 140,000 acres in central Nebraska.
The $183 million modification of the Garrison Diversion unit of the Missouri River Basin project in North Dakota, which would supply water to an initial stage development of 250,000 acres.
The $45.5 million Burns Creek project, to build a reregulating reservoir and hydroelectric power plant on the Upper Snake River near Idaho Falls, Idaho.
Research to provide an adequate scientific basis for decision-making is a primary need in solving the practical problems of water-resource management.
Water knowledge is needed to establish and maintain scientific hydrology at a level that will assure advances in our understanding of the dynamic processes in nature which affect the occurrence, movement, quality, and usability of water.
Without this information, much conservation effort with water, soils, and other resources will be of uncertain value.
The solution of water supply and pollution problems will continue to require the gathering and compiling of basic data, such as the first nationwide compilation of streamflow data by principal drainage basins, recently completed by the Department's Geological Survey.
Perhaps of equal economic importance is the series of reports dealing with the frequency and magnitude of floods which, together with a series of flood inundation maps, provide essential data for planning protective works and for proper zoning of flood plans.
This basic research work of the Geological Survey ties in closely with the saline water program.
Its studies on water quality and water resources help to determine areas where saline water conversion might be considered in the foreseeable future.
During the fiscal year, the Bureau of Reclamation vigorously pursued an intensified program of engineering research aimed at reducing losses of valuable water from evaporation, transpiration of waterstealing phreatophyte plants and weeds, seepage losses, and other causes.
The second in a series of major cooperative field experiments with methods of reducing water losses due to evaporation by use of chemical monolayer films was conducted during the year on Sahuaro Lake in Arizona.
Participating in the experiment were engineers and scientists of the Bureau, the Department's Geological Survey, and the United States Public Health Service.
Sahuaro Lake, site of the test, is a 1,260-acre reservoir behind Stewart Mountain Dam on the Salt River Reclamation Project near Phoenix, Ariz.
The experiment showed reductions in water losses attributable to evaporation of approximately 14 percent for the period of October 1–November 17, 1960, and savings of about 22 percent for the October 19–November 17 period when maximum coverage was employed.
The first major field experiment was conducted in 1958 on the 2,500- acre Lake Hefner—a reservoir serving the domestic needs of Oklahoma City—and effected savings of about 9 percent in water losses from evaporation.
Additionally, research contracts in this field were executed in the 1961 fiscal vear with Columbia University and with the Desert Research Institute of the University of Nevada.
Thus action is being speeded to reduce as rapidly as possible the water evaporation losses in the West which now total about 25 million acre-feet per year.
At the same time, the Bureau of Reclamation announced that its research and development work in low-cost canal linings during the past 15 vears have contributed to total savings to western water users of more than $20 million in the construction of irrigation canals.
Results of this program demonstrate that use of such linings can reduce annual canal seepage losses in the foreseeable future by an estimated 1.5 million acre-feet of water.
Thus on many fronts the Department of the Interior is moving at a greatly accelerated pace toward solutions to the water problems which, unmet, could threaten our national development and progress in the years ahead.
A major key to continuation of this Nation's vast industrial development—indeed to the preservation of its basic strength—lies in our ability to find ways of developing sufficient electrical capacity to meet the enormous future needs.
Accordingly, early in 1961, the Secretary of the Interior outlined a broad new power policy for the Department calling for a vigorous program of full development and maximum utilization of our total energy resources.
Dam closure: Fall, 1962 First power production: 1964 Installed power capacity: 900,000 kw.
Bureau of Census projections show an increase in population of the four Upper Colorado Basin States from 3.9 million in 1960 to 6.4 million by 1980, an increase of 64 percent.
At the same time, the Federal Power Commission projection of power needs for these States shows a requirement of 66,737 million kilowatt-hours in 1980, compared with 15,242 million kilowatt-hours used in 1960.
This represents an increase of 337 percent in less than two decades—more than quadrupling the 1960 requirements.
Obviously, the hydro plants of the Colorado River Storage Project cannot fill in all of this vast growth—nor can any single public or private utility.
Consequently, the Departmental policy placed emphasis on the need for maximum effort by all utility systems—Federal, State, municipal, private, and cooperative—in the interest of the public welfare.
2. Planning for the early interconnection of areas served by Department marketing agencies with adequate common-carrier transmission lines.
A first important step toward achievement of these aims came during the year when the Department's Bonneville Power Administration, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and nine private and public owners of hydroelectric generating facilities signed a coordination agreement designed to maximize power production at existing powerplants on Pacific Northwest rivers.
The agreement provides that storage and generating facilities on Pacific Northwest rivers shall be operated in much the same manner as if all were under one ownership.
It also provides for interchanges of energy and power among the signers in order to conserve water in reservoirs, and for coordination of the transmission facilities of the parties to the agreement.
Informal coordination in varying degrees prior to the signing of the agreement had resulted in approximately 1 million additional kilowatts.
A substantial added number of firm kilowatts is expected to result from the agreement.
Another important step toward implementation of the Department's more vigorous power conservation and development policy was taken early in the year with appointment of a departmental task force to study the feasibility of a proposed extra high voltage common carrier power intertie between the Pacific Northwest and Pacifie Southwest.
In a preliminary report on its findings, delivered in May, the study group indicated that the proposed intertie holds considerable promise of mutual benefit to both areas, by taking advantage of the diversity of loads, coordination of thermal and hydro plants and disposal of power surpluses during certain periods.
From a strictly engineering viewpoint, the report said that technology of extra high voltage transmission lines in the United States is “sufficiently advanced so that lines up to and including 500 kilovolts can be constructed without delay.
The United States now uses lines up to 345 kv.
In April, 1961, the Secretary of the Interior appointed a committee to join with representatives of the Edison Electric Institute in studies designed to determine where the pooling of private and public power production would serve the national interest.
As the result of Federal initiative in this matter, the Institute in September announced a 10-year program of transmission line construction which could well open the way for a major cooperative planning effort of interconnecting and pooling facilities of public systems with those of private industry.
At the same time, the action can represent the forerunner to the logical next step—a cooperative industry-governmental effort to plan for the full utilization of the present and future facilities of private industry, consumer-owned utilities, and the Federal Government.
Typical of the programs which the Department has supported to increase power development while at the same time promoting resource conservation for the future is the treaty with Canada under which the Arrow Lakes, Mica Creek, and Duncan Lake dams will be built on the upper Columbia River.
These three dams, together with Libby Dam to be constructed in Montana, would provide additional storage for the heavy spring and summer runoff of the Columbia River system.
The treaty requires full coordination of Pacific Northwest storage and electric generation to get the most power production out of the Canadian storage to be provided under terms of the treaty.
Canada is to receive 50 percent of all the additional power that can be generated downstream in the United States because of this storage.
Ratification of the treaty is pending in Canada.
With the three Canadian dams and Libby Dam in full operation over 2 million kilowatts of firm power would be added to the Federal system in the United States.
A significant fact concerning this program is that it is designed to conserve an important renewable but presently wasted energy resource.
Through the years, such losses nationally have been on an almost incredible scale.
For example, in the calendar year 1961, some $30,- 000,000 worth of electric energy will be wasted over the spillways of Columbia River Federal dams because of the present inadequacy of transmission lines to market areas.
In many ways, the Department of the Interior is acting now to curb this wastage of a vital resource and to assure that our total supply of electric energy will be adequate to meet tomorrow's needs.
Shortly after the election in November 1960, President-elect Kennedy set forth the mandate on which his Administration is basing a determined effort to help our Indian citizens take their rightful place in the nation.
We want every group which is now unable to make its full contribution to American strength to be given the opportunity to do so. It is in this spirit that we shall approach our work on Indian reservations, and it is in this spirit, I am sure, that Indians throughout the country will work together for a better life for themselves and thus a stronger America."
As the Federal agency primarily responsible for carrying out this Presidential mandate, the Department of the Interior has embarked on a top priority program designed to provide self-sufficiency for the Indians as rapidly as possible, within the protection guaranteed them by history.
In February 1961, a special task force was appointed by the Secretary of the Interior to make a thorough study of the problems and programs affecting the lives of the 360,000 Indians still living on reservations, and the some 160,000 living in other areas, and to put forward recommendations looking toward “a better life" for these Americans.
In July, the task force—after travelling 15,000 miles and conferring with the representatives of 200 organized tribes—completed its report.
The comprehensive document recommended programs and actions designed to blaze a new trail in Indian development.
During the 90 years which have elapsed since the United States Government ceased to make treaties with Indian tribes, Congress has appropriated millions of dollars to finance its programs for the protection, subsistence and acculturation of this relatively small group of Americans ...
From time to time during these 90 years, critics of the Federal Indian program have raised the question of how long the Government must continue its special relationship with Indians.
Underlying their concern has been an awareness of the accelerating cost of the program, a belief that to provide special services for Indians places them in a privileged category, and a contention that, because of excessive paternalism, the Federal program prevents Indians from achieving their maximum degree of self-sufficiency.
An examination of the history and present status of Indian affairs reveals a certain justification for the reservations which these critics have expressed.
Annual direct expenditures by the Federal Government for its services to Indians have risen from slightly over $7 million in 1871 to more than $160 million in 1961.
Many treaties and hundreds of Federal statutes qualify Indians for services in the fields of health, education, welfare, banking and land management which are not available from governmental sources to any other group of Americans.
Furthermore, the administration of these services has often been characterized by a paternalistic emphasis which has fostered continuing Indian dependence .
Yet, even those who are most eager to end this special relationship are troubled by the fact that the bulk of the reservation Indian population is less well educated than other Americans, has a shorter life span, and has a much lower standard of living .
What we are attempting to do for those in the underdeveloped areas of the world, we can and must also do for the Indians here at home. Furthermore, to insure the success of our endeavor, we must solicit the collaboration of those whom we hope to benefit—the Indians themselves. To do otherwise is contrary to the American concept of democracy. Basically, we must not forget that ours is a program which deals with human beings. We must have faith in their abilities to help themselves and be willing to take some risks with them."
Much of the progress which the Indians have made has occurred during the past 40 years.
They have been considered citizens only since 1924 and, in Arizona and New Mexico, their right to vote was not confirmed in the courts until 1948.
Statutory authority for the organization of tribal governments was provided by Congress just a little over 25 years ago, and Indian youth have been drafted for military service only since World War II.
The events of these past 40 years have done much to make Indians aware of the fact that they cannot alone decide the kind of future world they will inhabit.
Furthermore, their experiences have shown them new ways of making their lives more secure and comfortable Now, the desire of many for better incomes, more formal education, better health, and more voice in their own affairs rivals their desire to retain older ways.
The task force believes that in the foreseeable future, the proper role of the Federal Government is to help Indians find their way along a new trail—one which leads to equal citizenship, maximum selfsufficiency, and full participation in American life.
In discharging this role, it must seek to make available to Indians a greater range of alternatives which are compatible with the American system, and where necessary, to assist Indians with choosing from among these alternatives.
As a part of this responsibility, it must mobilize and direct the vast reservoir of good will toward Indians which is found throughout the country.
Finally, since many of the problems relating to Indian development are local problems, it must use its influence to persuade local governments, as well as those who live near Indian reservations, to recognize their stake in the Indian future and to work with the Indians and with the Federal Government in preparing the new trail."
The American Indian bas learned that through conservation he can put to work bis natural and human resources for the betterment of his people.
The recommendations of the task force in regard to programs for Indian progress were promptly made a part of the Department's official policy.
These programs are designed to provide better housing, better health, more income, more education, better training, more and better opportunity for steady work at better wages, and the maximum development and use of natural resources on the reservations.
Already important forward steps have been taken toward achievement of these aims.
During the past 30 years—through tribal and individual enterprise and with practical help and technical guidance from the Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs—considerable development of physical resources in the Indian country has taken place.
If we regard the 53 million acres of Indian land that is in trust or restricted status as a whole unit, it is safe to say that far more income is being produced from this unit today than was the case 30 years ago, or even 10.
But it is also clear that the potential of these 53 million acres has never come any where close to fulfillment.
The existing land base could be much more profitably utilized if it were worked by its Indian owners instead of being leased, as it is so often, to non-Indian tenants.
In addition, several hundred thousand acres of additional land have irrigation potential but have not yet been brought under ditch.
Continuing progress on this front is essential for two reasons: First, to improve the economic well-being of the Indian landowners; but also, to safeguard the valuable water rights that go with the land under various laws and court decisions, both of the Federal Government and of the States.
The Department is pressing ahead vigorously toward solutions in these areas.
In further response to the Presidential mandate for action leading toward a better life for American Indians, the Department is pressing forward rapidly with timber inventories on the commercially important Indian forest lands.
The purpose is to provide better information on which to base cutting schedules.
Forest inventories have now been completed on about three-fourths of the area.
Inventories pay for themselves not only in planning but eventually help increase Indian income.
Present indications are that the annual cut from Indian forested lands can eventually be increased by somewhere in the neighborhood of a hundred million board-feet above the level in recent years without injury to the basie forest.
Some tribal groups are favored by nature with rich deposits of oil, gas, and other minerals which have recently been discovered, are being commercially developed, and are producing substantial tribal income.
As a part of its effort to improve the welfare of the Indians, the Department has under way a full program of resource development which will provide for the use of the best modern techniques in minerals exploration and development throughout the entire Indian country.
As mechanization and automation have moved into farming and ranching the opportunities for seasonal unskilled labor become smaller every year.
This hits the Indian worker harder than others.
The Department is in the process of developing a number of related programs to meet this growing problem.
One of the methods is the use of special inducements—such as plant sites, facilities, and on-the-job training programs—to bring manufacturing employment to the reservation areas.
In a small number of reservations, there are programs of this type, but it is the Department's aim that this activity be substantially and swiftly increased.
A depressed reservation area can be improved by bringing individual Indians into contact with areas of greater opportunity.
This means education in the broad sense; it means vocational training; it means job placement; and for those who wish it, it means relocation.
The Department feels that it should be a source of concern to all Americans that after many years of educational efforts on behalf of the Indians, adult Indians living on reservations remain, on the average, only half as well schooled as adults elsewhere.
Our failure to achieve better results in educational programs also is reflected in the large numbers of Indians who have no occupational skills; and this lack is in turn reflected in grim statistics of poverty, delinquency, and dependency.
We, as a people, face a major challenge in schooling and in vocational preparation of the Indians.
We are still short 5,000 classroom seats to accommodate children of school age who are not now enrolled in any school—State, Federal, or private.
We need to relieve the serious overcrowding which has developed in many of the schools presently operated by the Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs.
We need to replace obsolete and dilapidated structures with up-todate facilities.
A good start already has been made, but with the population growth that faces us on the reservations, we have a major challenge in this area alone.
We also must work continuously to improve the quality of classroom instruction.
As one example, the children who come from non-English speaking homes have special needs which have not been met in the past, but which must be met.
In all of these matters, the basic aim is to insure that the present and future generations of Indian children receive the same educational advantages, the same educational opportunities as other children throughout the country.
It is not a simple problem, and it is a very important one.
Adults bevond school age also have an intensive need.
Many adults on the reservations have had little or no formal schooling in their youth.
They need an educational program suited to their special situation, and Federal programs are being carried out in this direction.
The leaders of the next generation will need to be college graduates trained in specialized schools of many kinds.
But such schools accept only high school graduates; and the dropout rate of Indian youngsters in high school is very high.
Programs are required to make certain that we are not losing potential leaders through high school dropouts, and to assure that more scholarship aid is available for Indian high school graduates.
In all of these educational problem areas, the Department of the Interior, under the stimulating and sympathetic leadership of President Kennedy, has in this fiscal year made progress of an encouraging nature.
This progress has been greatly facilitated through following the guidelines laid out in the Indian task force report.
One of the most encouraging forward steps has been in the field of adult vocational training.
In the first session of the 87th Congress, legislation was approved providing for the training of more adult Indians in vocational schools and more on-the-job training in industrial plants.
This program will be inereased as rapidly as possible to at least twice its present size.
Intertwined with all programs of human and natural resource development for the American Indian is the great need for improved housing on the reservations.
In its report, the task force, with careful deliberation, used the phrase "truly shocking" to describe the housing conditions it encountered in its studies.
Throughout past decades, Federal assistance has been provided for public housing in many forms throughout the nation.
But prior to this Administration, no such assistance had been available in the Indian country.
Thus, another important step in blazing a new trail for the American Indian took place in September when President Kennedy took part in a Housing and Home Finance Agency ceremony by which the first application for a public housing project on an Indian reservation was approved.
Following this first step, priority status has been assigned by the Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs to the development of further housing project applications as rapidly as possible.
From these highlights, then, it can be clearly seen that President Kennedy's desire to speed the development of the human and natural resources of the Indian reservations has already produced the first steps in a considerable betterment in the Indian way of life.
Obviously, much remains to be accomplished.
But the machinery has now been set in motion which will assist the some half-million Indians both on and off the reservations to bridge the gap now separating them from full participation in the benefits and challenges of present-day American life.
For 175 years, the public domain has furnished lands and natural resources to help meet the needs of a growing nation.
More than half of the public domain has been taken over by private citizens—to settle, develop, and use.
Although no longer used primarily for settlement, the vast remainder of our public domain has a variety of vital uses, which become inereasingly important and highly competitive as our population increases and gradually shifts westward.
Today, more than 168 million acres of the national land reserve plus 309 million acres of other Federal lands could and should be developed, improved, conserved, and utilized under aggressive Federal land and resource management.
During this fiscal year, the Department of the Interior has instituted vigorous actions toward this end.
Our remaining public lands still offer present and potential natural resources of inestimable value—timber, outdoor recreation, forage, coal, oil, and minerals—all important resources of tomorrow.
But the problem is to assure—through sound and orderly management—that the resources will be there when they are needed tomorrow.
Immediate steps must be taken to restore and improve the productivity of millions of acres that have been ravaged by floods and winds, or exhausted through overuse.
Renewable resources must be managed on a sustained vield basis.
Nonrenewable resources must be extracted without waste—and with particular concern for soil and water conservation.
Because of the proximity of much of the public domain to expanding western cities and communities, it is inevitable that demands will increase for public lands for urban and business development, and for outdoor recreational facilities.
Immediately upon taking office in 1961, the Secretary of the Interior was confronted with an overwhelming backlog of incompleted applications for public lands, many of them filed 3 and 4 years previously.
As a result, the Secretary ordered an 18-month moratorium on most types of nonmineral applications and petitions for lands of the public domain.
Not affected were applications filed prior to the moratorium.
Also unaffected were petitions from State and local governments, applications and offers under the mining and mineral leasing laws, and serip rights and settlement claims in Alaska.
Reason for the backlog was a continual deluge of thousands of applications, often the result of duplicate filing and other questionable practices of some land locators and speculators.
These and other practices consumed valuable processing time, and cost the American public millions of dollars.
Tasks of processing were made more arduous by the lack of a precise inventory of remaining tracts and areas of the public domain, and the statutory need for adhering to certain antiquated and frequently ambiguous public land laws and other regulations.
First : to eliminate the backlog of applications.
Third: to review and revise regulations of the Department, and to initiate legislation proposals necessary to modernize and streamline the nation's land laws.
Only through knowledge of the characteristics and capabilities of our remaining public lands can their best ultimate usage and proper management of the Nation's estate be achieved.
To provide this information, the Department's Bureau of Land Management is conducting an inventory, evaluation, and classification of the national land reserve.
Areas are being classified for many uses—for urban development, public outdoor recreation, forestry, mining, wildlife, grazing, and other purposes, often in combination.
This—the first program of its kind—represents a significant step toward better Federal land management and improved conservation of our natural resources for tomorrow.
An important program for utilizing the lands of the public domain involves the administration of Federal land laws by the Department.
Under these laws, ownership of more than one billion acres of public lands have been transferred to State and local governments, and to private individuals, during the past 150 years.
Still in effect today are more than 5,000 laws pertaining to the disposition of public lands.
Many of these laws are throwbacks to the 19th century, and today are obsolete, impractical, and antiquated.
As a first and significant step toward rectifying part of this problem of archaic land laws, the Department has recommended to Congress the enactment of a single land-sale law to replace about 30 old laws dating as far back as 1877.
Other legislative proposals of this type will be made in future months.
To achieve productivity and also satisfy conflicting demands for use of certain areas of public lands, a revitalized program of balanced usage is being developed by the Department's Bureau of Land Management.
Balanced usage is essentially the best and most effective use of the available resources of public lands—mitigated by the total availability of these resources regionally and nationally, the conservation of resources for future utilization, and a reconciliation of conflicting demands for current use of the lands.
Conservation is not hoarding.
It is the full, judicious, and balanced usage of our natural resources, dominated at all times by the need to end waste.
Broad programs for soil and moisture conservation are currently concerned with correcting soil erosion and water losses that sometimes occur in parts of the public domain, particularly on Federal range lands west of the Rocky Mountain region.
Revegetation—through seeding and planting—of eroded lands is doing much to improve the forage capacity of publie lands used by livestock and wildlife.
In some instances, new soil areas are being substituted for older, overused areas.
The fertility of good acreages is being revitalized, and that of poor acreages being reestablished, by better tillage techniques, adequate use of fertilizer, and other measures.
General responsibility for the care and conservation of public lands includes continuing programs for the protection of natural resources from trespass, fire, insects, disease, and other depredation.
Facilitating this work, more than a thousand miles of access roads are maintained annually throughout the nation.
Our extraction processes for minerals, timber, and other products of the soil are often wasteful.
Increased productivity now requires modern and more effective extractive methods.
Such methods are now being studied and developed as rapidly as possible by the Department.
Of all our efforts to conserve vital natural resources for tomorrow's needs, our forest lands present the sharpest challenge to our foresight.
This can be realized more clearly when we consider that the trees we plant today will not reach the minimum sizes needed for lumber until the year 2000.
Yet, somehow, we must be prepared to meet a projected doubling of our current lumber consumption within 40 years.
At present cutting rates, we are using up our old growth timber in Western stands.
Because of the time requirements involved, we must move now to meet anticipated future needs, and improve the productivity of our nearly 500 million acres of commercial forest land.
Of these 500 million acres the Department has responsibility for approximately 52 million acres as well as for an additional 131 million acres of noncommercial forest lands.
1. Provide adequate protection from fires, insects and diseases.
2. Identify specifically those public domain lands which should become a part of the national land reserve for forest management.
3. Complete the network of access roads required for protection, for the removal of forest products and for recreation.
4. Provide for the early reforestation of over 1 million acres.
5. Improve the quality of the growing stock within over 2 million acres.
In his message, the President called upon the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior to coordinate programs and policies of their agencies for improved management of Federal forest lands looking toward greater productivity without diminishing the basic resource.
The two Departments have undertaken an intensive joint study of existing timber sale and management practices, and, in midyear, adopted the broad recommendations of the study group designed to achieve closer uniformity in these practices.
Among the recommendations adopted were orders to the agencies involved within the Departments to standardize management plan inventory procedures, and to reconcile differences in determining allowable timber cut.
Other recommendations included possible adoption of a joint nursery program, and action to meet land jurisdictional problems in the complicated checkerboard ownership areas of Western Oregon.
Additionally, by Presidential directive, the two Departments acted in concert during the year to accelerate the building of access roads to public forests in a move aimed at making additional supplies of merchantable timber available to small businesses.
While recommendations of the joint study group apply primarily to Federal forest lands in Western Oregon, some idea of the scope of the agreement may be seen in the fact that the six national forests in Western Oregon, under jurisdiction of the U.S. Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture, embrace approximately 6.3 million acres from which some 1.8 billion board feet of timber are harvested each year; while the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Land Management has the responsibility for about 2.5 million acres of Federal lands in 18 Western Oregon counties which produce more than 1 billion board feet of timber annually.
Additionally, this Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs is responsible for some 2.1 million acres of commercially valuable Indianowned forest lands in the Pacific Northwest, producing nearly 400 million board feet of timber a year.
About 160 million acres, or half of the public lands in 10 Western States, are used primarily for raising livestock.
Although much of the region is arid and mountainous, there is enough moisture to grow some vegetation.
But for the most effective use of resources of the Federal range, there must always be sufficient grass and forage to feed livestock and wildlife.
Whenever too many cattle, sheep, or wildlife roam the range, vegetation suffers.
And without plant cover, the rich topsoil washes away, and erosion ravages the terrain.
In a few years, there are vast areas of devastation, vacant of vegetation and topsoil.
Each year, thousands of tons of topsoil are washed down major rivers of the West.
Exactly in this way, more than 100 million acres of our publie lands have been allowed to deteriorate during past years.
Toward a solution, a new start is necessary—with a more aggressive program of Federal range management to put a stop as rapidly as possible to this enormous waste.
During 1961, the Department devised and began work on a programí designed to achieve this end.
The program proposed—in total—is both sweeping and costly.
But it is also necessary that it be pressed forward without delay.
It will take decades to reclaim and restore many of the devastated areas.
After inventory and evaluation of critically affected areas of the Federal range, the program features an accelerated restoration of durable plant cover—by seeding, planting, and proper management.
At the same time, soil and moisture conservation projects are being used to regulate run-off from watersheds, and divert water to critical areas.
The wealth of the publie lands—with their forests, ranges, minerals, recreational potentials—is an important segment of our national heritage.
Such wasteful inattention to this vital resource as that which permitted 100 million acres to become useless and denuded has in the past constituted what amounts to a national disgrace.
Through the vigorous new conservation programs being instituted by this Administration, the tide is being turned and the riches of our lands are being not only guarded for today, but enhanced for the future.
Planning for the development of mineral resources to meet tomorrow's needs embraces both a short and a long-range view.
To those who must decide how and where Governmental efforts will be directed, the future consists of two tomorrows.
First, there is a tomorrow that is almost here—a future that can be predicted with some certainty.
This period, comprising the immediate years ahead, can, for convenience, be called “Tomorrow— 1970."
Its problems in resource conservation are known—or can at least be anticipated—and, for the most part, they entail keeping abreast of relatively gradual changes.
There is also a more distant tomorrow—the year 2000 and beyond— for which mineral requirements and possible ways of fulfilling them must be appraised now.
The future cannot be forecast with scientific precision.
Therefore, programs must be both dynamic and flexible.
They must be subject to continual review, and they must be revised as frequently as necessary in technological, economic, political, or social conditions.
The total environment in which the mineral industries will operate is expected to change only gradually within the next 10 to 20 years.
International tensions may well continue, the nation's population and its economy should expand steadily, and its standard of living undoubtedly will keep rising.
Costs of discovering, extracting, and processing minerals will increase, as will the costs of research, but probably not enough to cause dramatie changes in technology.
An unsettled and highly competitive international situation, combined with the pressures generated by a steadily growing population and more complex economy, make it necessary that the United States continue to have adequate supplies of minerals and fuels to meet its expanding needs.
We live in an age of phenomenal technological progress.
There seems to be virtually nothing that seience cannot give mankind, and of late her gifts have been many and diverse.
However, each advance, each forward step of science, almost invariably creates additional demands for metals, nonmetallics, and fuels.
Realizing that minerals are essential to progress, the Department of the Interior has, during the fiscal year just closed, intensified research on mineral raw materials.
To begin this expansion, the Congress, during the year appropriated additional funds for the Department's Bureau of Mines to finance intensified studies in this important area.
Through these studies, the Department is seeking high-purity metals with special properties that will withstand extreme conditions encountered by high-speed aircraft, missiles, and space vehicles, or which will perform reliably in tomorrow's nuclear power plants and complex electronic computers and guidance systems.
At the same time, other Bureau of Mines scientists are working to develop new synthetics that will equal or out-perform natural minerals.
This work may well lead to establishment of entirely new industries, in the same way that Departmental research opened the way for commercial production of titanium and zirconium.
Investigations to improve extractive processes also are being stepped up, both to broaden our domestic resource base and to keep mining and processing costs down.
These studies will gain added impetus during the coming year when the Department acquires 155,000 curies of Cobalt-60 from the Atomic Energy Commission.
This gamma ray source—one of the largest in the world—will enable researchers to evaluate radiation as a means of speeding mineral-extractive processes and of altering the properties of minerals and mineral fuels.
To insure adequate supplies of traditional raw materials, the Bureau of Mines is intensifying research on methods of producing iron, copper, lead, manganese, clays, and other materials from lowgrade resources and from deposits lying at depths too great for economic recovery under present conditions.
One of the most important and dramatic conservation developments of the year came with the launching by the Department of its new helium-conservation program.
The program, climaxing many months of study and careful planning, is a cooperative undertaking by Government and industry through which privately built and operated plants will capture helium from certain natural gases destined for fuel markets.
Underlying the urgent need for this conservation effort is the fact that the equivalent of a year's supply of helium now is lost every 45 days.
If such waste were permitted to continue, the Nation's limited helium reserves could not be relied upon to supply anticipated national requirements beyond 1985.
The new program provides for recovering and storing for future use 52 billion cubic feet of helium which otherwise would be wasted when natural gases containing this valuable element are burned for fuel.
The Department began negotiations with private firms in March 1961, shortly after enabling legislation for the program became effective, and during the year contracts were awarded to four private companies covering the entire $47.5 million annual contracting authority made available by the Congress.
Demand for this second lightest of the elements has grown phenomenally within the past decade.
Lightness, inertness, and super-fluidity have made helium a versatile aid to American industry, which uses it in many different processes ranging from shielded-arc welding and the growing of semiconductor crystals to quality control tests for air conditioners, refrigerators, and missile components.
The element also plays essential roles in the Nation's nuclear-energy and space programs.
Perhaps the most promising use of helium is as a liquid whose extreme coldness (-452° F.) enables scientists to enter the realm of absolute zero.
At this temperature, where molecular action virtually stops, researchers in the field known as “cryogenics" are uncovering new facts about the properties and behavior of a wide variety of materials.
With liquid helium to help them, they are probing deeper into the mysteries of life and death.
Applications for helium for this use and others are expanding so rapidly that the Bureau of Mines estimates some 36 billion cubic feet of helium will be required for domestic use within the next 25 years.
The Department's new conservation program will insure that all essential demands are met and that large quantities of helium are placed in storage for use as needed in the future.
By the beginning of the next century, the complex of factors influencing, and depending upon, effective utilization of mineral resources shall have changed markedly.
If the present trend continues, the population of the United States will be approximately 300 million.
In some parts of the world, there may literally be "Standing Room Only."
This growth in population may well be accompanied by significant changes in national economies and international relationships.
Technology, too, shall have altered tremendously.
In short, those changes that are foreseen as being gradual over the next two or three decades will culminate 40 years from now in conditions decidedly different from those of today.
In 2000 A.D., man will be mining the earth at far greater depths than now—and perhaps the ocean and the air as well.
The prospector will require devices which can detect deposits far beneath the earth's crust, and tell him directly and accurately how much of which minerals are there.
The miner will need vastly different methods and equipment that can withstand, and perhaps utilize, high temperatures and other adverse conditions which will be encountered in workings miles below the surface.
The metallurgist must have at hand techniques which will permit recovery of minute values from extremely dilute solutions such as seawater.
The energy picture also shall have undergone a drastic change.
New sources such as nuclear power, fuel cells, and perhaps solar energy will be helping conventional fuels supply an enormously larger market.
Through synthesis, substitution, and transmutation, science will have to provide those materials which no longer are available in natural form or which may have become too expensive to produce by conventional methods.
This second tomorrow is remote.
Nevertheless, it is inevitable, and only by trying to visualize it as realistically as possible by extrapolation of known circumstances can we prepare for it.
The fate of our civilization—and that of the entire world—may well depend upon our readiness.
The Department is preparing to help meet the vastly increased mineral requirements of the future by steadily strengthening its basic research and resource appraisal programs.
Tomorrow's technology will grow out of today's basic research.
The scientific marvels of the present—jet propulsion, atomic energy, rocketry, and similar modern miracles—have been derived from the basic research of the past.
World War II and the sustained technological drive which followed it have in a period of years heavily depleted the reserve fund of unused basic research data accumulated through generations of fundamental investigations.
Replenishment of this reservoir to support the advances in mineral technology which the future will require has been a major objective of the Department in 1961—and shall continue as a high priority in the years ahead.
Today's basic research by the Department's Bureau of Mines covers a broad range of subjects and scientifie disciplines and utilizes the latest techniques and equipment.
In the field of mining, Bureau scientists are seeking a better understanding of rock and soil mechanics and trying to learn more about the action of explosives in breaking rock.
The fundamental natures and structures of coal, petroleum, oil shale, and a wide variety of metals and nonmetals are being studied.
In each of these areas, the Department is laying a foundation of basic knowledge that is essential to assured advancement in all branches of mineral technology.
In the field of mineral resources, as in other areas of Departmental responsibility, the next century will witness growing competition for the nation's natural wealth.
The miner, the manufacturer, and the farmer of the future may each have a valid claim to the same limited quantity of some essential mineral resource or the land in which it occurs.
When that time comes, Government can serve the people best by having at hand the information that will promote equitable and effective use of all resources.
Decisions as to whether public lands should be leased for mineral development or withheld for recreational use, or whether valuable mineral deposits should be inundated to provide irrigation water for farmlands, can be made only with full knowledge of the relevant facts and with an eye to the distant future.
For many years, the Department's Bureau of Mines has collected and correlated economic and technical data on production, distribution, consumption, and utilization of minerals and fuels in the United States and abroad.
Such information, analyzed and evaluated by specialists, has provided a basis for intelligent planning of Bureau research and other activities.
The results of these studies also have been disseminated to other Federal and State agencies, to industry, and to the public.
This kind of information has consistently proved its usefulness in many areas of public and private interest.
To promote intelligent and effective utilization of mineral resources in the future, the Bureau is expanding and intensifying its fact-gathering program.
Studies of the methods employed and the costs involved in extracting, processing, and distributing minerals and fuels are being accelerated, and new emphasis is being placed on investigations that will reveal the true importance of minerals to different segments of the economy and the extent to which utilization of various resources depends upon development of others.
A comprehensive resource-appraisal program, designed to provide a definitive balance sheet for domestic mineral and energy supplies, also is under way.
Throughout the mineral-bearing regions of the United States, teams of Departmental scientists operate in mobile geochemical laboratories to seek out new mineral resources for the future needs of America.
Thus, by seeking new materials and additional sources of those we already have, by minimizing waste, by rebuilding our fund of basie knowledge, and by acquiring the facts essential to effective and equitable use, the Department is preparing for the mineral-resource problems of tomorrow.
The success of these major efforts will contribute significantly to the survival and growth of our society.
To keep pace with the nation's growth and economic progress, tomorrow's mineral resource needs must be met by today's exploration.
Important mineral deposits must be found well in advance of actual needs because of the time required to bring them into production.
The easily discovered mineral deposits have nearly all been found and exploited, thus increasing the difficulty and risk of finding new deposits to maintain an adequate level of domestic supply.
A vigorous program of exploration is essential to meet the growing needs of the future in the face of these increasing difficulties.
Today's costs and risks are so great that private industry, in many instances, is reluctant to undertake the entire burden of the search for new domestic sources of minerals.
Therefore, the Government shares this burden through the Department's Office of Minerals Exploration, which will pay one-half of the cost of the work authorized by exploration assistance contracts, with repayment from royalties on production.
The list of mineral commodities eligible for exploration assistance has now been expanded to 38 by the addition of gold, silver, iron ore, bismuth, sulphur, and tellurium.
Other changes presently are being considered which will help industry in the search for new mineral reserves.
Studies undertaken by the Department's Geological Survey in 1961 revealed that coal constitutes 68 percent of the total ultimate recoverable reserves of mineral fuels in the United States.
Petroleum and natural gas, the studies showed, total about 16 percent of the ultimate fossil fuel reserves, and oil from oil shale accounts for another 16 percent.
The estimated recoverable coal reserves of the nation totaled 830 billion tons as of January 1, 1960.
Of this huge tonnage—some 1,442 times the recent annual production—47 percent is bituminous, 25.5 percent is sub-bituminous, 26 percent is lignite and 1.5 percent is anthracite and semi-anthracite.
Even assuming a great increase in the rate of coal production, these reserves will last for many generations.
Despite these impressive figures, the problem of the use of coal as a fuel remains far from a solution.
To assist in the development of a stronger coal market in the immediate years ahead, and to insure optimum use of this vast resource, the Congress authorized the creation within the Department of the Office of Coal Research.
Research will be measured by its contribution to the development of expanded coal markets.
Most of the increase in the use of coal in future years is expected to come from the expansion of the industry's two largest growth markets—steel and the electric utilities.
Today the Tennessee Valley Authority is one of the nation's best coal customers.
In fiscal year 1960, it used more than 18.6 million tons of coal for which it paid more than 82.5 million dollars.
But the coal industry knows from experience that even “assured" markets-—as the railroad and domestic consumers once were—can be lost through lack of progress and research.
Both steel and the electrie utilities can and will use the energy fuel that results in the lowest generated cost of electricity.
Any appreciable change in the relative costs of coal, oil and gas would result in the gain or loss of millions of tons of market.
Thus, a vital function of the Office of Coal Research—which began its operations in the fiscal year just closed—is to aid in finding better and cheaper ways of mining and preparing coal, delivering it to the consumer at lower cost, and improving the efficiency and convenience of its utilization.
As contrasted with the longer-term and more-basic research program of the Bureau of Mines, the new Office of Coal Research is concentrating its efforts on short-range projects aimed at providing the most immediate assistance to the coal industry.
During 1961, more than 100 contract proposals were received and reviewed by the Office of Coal Research.
These proposals came from colleges and universities, coal industry research groups, corporate research organizations, mining and industrial companies, and in some cases from private individuals.
A milepost of the year was the signing of the first formal contract by the Secretary of the Interior.
It calls for a comprehensive study to identify new products which would expand present coal markets and generate new ones.
Although the final report will not be available until early in 1962, sufficient information will be developed in 1961 to aid the Office in maximizing its impact and to indicate new areas of immediate promise.
To meet the resource needs of the future, the Department promoted the conservation of oil and gas through scientific studies to insure efficient production and minimum waste.
The nation's crude reserves were estimated at 31.6 billion barrels at the end of 1960—down more than 100 million barrels from the end of 1959.
Natural gas liquids reserves were estimated at 6.8 billion barrels, an increase of nearly 300 million barrels from the preceding year.
Total reserves of liquid hydrocarbons—crude and natural gas liquids—were estimated at nearly 38.5 billion barrels, an increase of more than 187 million from the 1959 total.
Production of crude oil for the year was estimated at more than 2.4 billion barrels, down nearly 12 million barrels from the 1959 total.
Output of natural gas liquids, however, totaled more than 430 million barrels, up more than 46 million from the preceding year, making total production of all liquid hydrocarbons total more than 2.9 billion barrels, an increase of more than 34 million barrels.
Production of natural gas in 1960 was estimated at more than 13 trillion cubic feet—an increase of nearly 650 billion from the previous year's total.
From these figures it would seem abundantly clear that the production and reserve problems of the oil and gas industries remain some distance in the future.
Yet, following President Kennedy's reminder in his natural resources message to the Congress that the continental shelves bordering the United States contain roughly 20 percent of our remaining reserves of crude oil and natural gas, the Department acted during 1961 to accelerate leasing action on the Outer Continental Shelf off Louisiana and Texas—the first such action since early in 1960.
But of still broader importance was the approval by the Senate of a resolution authorizing the Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs to make a full and complete investigation of the current and prospective fuel and energy resources of the United States, and of the present and probable future rates of consumption of these resources.
The Committee, in addition, will examine Governmental policies and laws affecting the fuels and energy industries with the view of determining what, if any, changes may be advisable in order to provide an effective national fuels policy.
The objective of the study, which was given the strong support of the Department of the Interior, is to set forth policy guidelines which will assure the availability of energy for our expanding economy and the security of the United States.
There have been several attempts in the past 25 years to deal broadly with energy problems at the Federal level.
However, the current study promises to be considerably more fruitful because it is the first full-scale examination of energy problems drawing upon the combined skills of the Congress, the Executive Branch, and the industries concerned.
Since the beginning of the 20th century, Indian lands have contributed importantly in supplying the nation's mineral needs.
One of the Department's aims is to facilitate their playing an equally, or even more significant role in the future.
The outlook, in broad terms, is distinctly encouraging.
Much of the oil and gas production from Indian lands has been in the Rocky Mountain region and the Williston Basin where exploratory work points to the strong possibility of broader producing areas.
On the Navajo Reservation, the number of applications that have been made for oil and gas leases foreshadows exploration of unproven areas and extension of proven fields.
Oil production from this area already is of considerable importance.
For example, the Greater Aneth field—probably the largest single field discovered in the last 10 years—is located almost entirely on the Navajo Reservation.
Announced plans for secondary recovery of petroleum resources from Indian lands through waterflooding insure the production of millions of barrels of additional oil in the years to come.
The cutback in purchases of uranium by the Atomic Energy Commission has reduced exploration and production of this mineral in a number of Indian areas.
Substantial evidence, however, now points to a growing “peaceful use" market for fissionable materials derived principally from uranium and much of this ore can be expected to come from Indian lands.
A great storehouse of mineral resources, is of course, within the lands of the public domain.
Administration and conservation of these vast mineral resources is the responsibility of the Department's Geological Survey and Bureau of Land Management.
The Geological Survey supervises all development and producing operations, and collects the royalties due the United States on such production.
The Bureau of Land Management issues all permits, licenses, and leases for coal, oil, gas, and other fuels and minerals.
Thus the two agencies share the responsibility for conservation of this valuable public resource.
President Kennedy has pointed out that, at present levels of use, this country alone will need an additional 3 billion pounds of fish and shellfish annually by 1980—and that many other countries with largescale protein deficiency can be greatly helped by more extensive use of marine foodstuffs.
This," the President said,"will require increased efforts, under Federal leadership, for rehabilitation of depleted stocks of salmon and sardines in the Pacific, groundfish and oysters in the Atlantic, lake trout and other desirable species in the Great Lakes, and many others through biological research, development of methods for passing fish over dams, and control of pollution. This Administration intends to give concerted attention to our whole national effort in the basic and applied research of oceanography."
Despite 90 years of effort by dedicated scientists, this announcement of plans for a comprehensive Federal oceanographic program represented the most important advance yet made toward the goal of “farming" the sea.
Through this program, now getting under way, will come the information needed for the harnessing and building of the forces which affect the living resources of the sea and disclose the ways of adapting them to the needs of man.
The food chain of the sea gets its start from two sources—nutrients from land brought into estaurine areas and tidal flats, and nutrients brought up from the depths of the ocean by natural upwellings, or vertical currents.
These upwellings occur usually in two types of situations.
They are found on the west side of continents because the winds from the land tend to push the water away from the shore, giving the lower strata of water a chance to rise.
They are also found along the Equator where the trade winds and the rotation of the earth combine to roll the surface waters north and south, leaving a trough which is filled with water from the lower levels.
At times upwellings may be found along the edges of some ocean currents where the meeting of cold and warm waters result in an upflow.
The nutrients so brought to the surface waters form the basis for the flood chain which supports the sea life in which man is most interested.
An ultimate accomplishment for the farming of the sea will be the creation of artificial upwellings to provide food for marine life when and where needed.
The practical-minded fishery scientist does not expect these results to be quickly arrived at, but he refuses to rule them out as a probability of the future resulting from increased scientifie knowledge together with the pressures of population growth.
While awaiting the time when atomic or other energy can be applied to create artificial upwellings, man must content himself with other ways of utilizing the components which support the food chain.
The seas are too vast and the waters too restless for the application of fertilizers as they are applied to land, but the use of trace elements which will energize and stimulate the growth possibilities already present is an avenue being considered.
At the same time the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service is giving increased attention to that part of aquaculture which has the best chance of success in the next few years.
This includes perfecting research and management techniques to assure that stocks of desirable species will not be depleted and replaced by less desirable or inferior species.
It also includes the culture of certain kinds of shellfish, particularly clams and oysters.
Since this type of marine life is more sedentary than many other forms it lends itself more readily to farming practices.
Culture of shellfish is not new, but this form of sea farming has been handicapped by such things as blight, predators, and lack of seed stock.
These problems have been under scrutiny, and answers are slowly but surely being found.
At the same time, research on selective breeding goes on.
An important development during the year was the granting of approval by the Congress for an emergency Alaska salmon research program.
This 2-year program, for which a total appropriation of $2.5 million was authorized, is now well under way.
Information gained from the investigations will supplement that already acquired through research conducted by the United States and investigations made under terms of the International Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific Ocean.
This Convention, between Japan, Canada, and the United States, became effective in 1953, and its continuation, termination, or amendment is scheduled to be decided upon at a meeting of the signatory nations in 1963.
Specific data sought through the emergency program relate to the carrying capacity of the Alaska spawning streams and methods of predicting salmon abundance.
The Alaska Department of Fish and Game and the Fisheries Research Institute of the University of Washington are aiding in the research under contracts with the Department's Bureau of Commercial Fisheries.
In another move involving international cooperation in conservation and development of fishery resources, the United States Government, acting upon the recommendation of the Department, has invited the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) to hold its world meeting on the biology of tuna and tuna-like fishes in July 1962, in the San Diego area of California.
The fundamental objective of the conference is to assess the potential of the world's tuna stocks.
The tunas, which were discarded fishes a half century ago, are now fished in every ocean except the Arctic and the Antartic and by fishermen of many nations.
It is hoped that from the conference will come a composite picture of the rate of utilization and the possibilities and limits of future development.
At the 1961 FAO International Conference on Fish in Nutrition— held in Washington—man was challenged to"plow" the seven seas and make them yield protein in twice the amount of that provided by land.
A study of the nation's estuarine areas to determine if the encroachments of civilization are destroying fishery resources which utilize estuaries and tidal flats at some stage in their life history, or whether these developments can be turned into assets for marine life.
Biological studies designed to guide man in the manner and times in which sea harvest can be taken most economically and the extent of the harvest to assure sustained yield of the resource.
A research program designed to assure full utilization of the health and nutritional values of fishery products.
The sea around us," President Kennedy has said, "represents one of our most important but least understood and most wholly undeveloped areas for extending our resource base."
During 1961, the Department of the Interior made important contributions toward better understanding and greater development of our great marine food resource.
Lying some 1,000 miles south of the Equator, American Samoa is a land of spectacular tropical beauty.
The islands boast one of the finest harbors in the Pacific, and because of this they represented an important staging area for part of the American war effort in the South Pacific.
Yet, in the intervening years, the needs of these beautiful islands and its people have been largely forgotten or ignored.
The situation in regard to education of American Samoa’s young people is a typical example.
Today, on the islands, there are 45 public elementary schools, but the existing public junior and senior high schools provide nowhere near the space or facilities to meet the needs of elementary school graduates.
Enrollment in the lone high school is currently limited to approximately 200 as contrasted to some 4,000 children enrolled in elementary schools.
We are having to turn down at least two-thirds of the students that graduate from junior high," Governor H. Rex Lee told the first session of the 87th Congress during hearings on appropriations for this fiscal year.
The situation has been much the same in other areas.
The existing power system, for instance, is subject to frequent failures and is unable to meet the current demand for power, to say nothing of the future.
This Department has moved rapidly to bring about important changes and improvements for these “"forgotten" people.
Congress granted appropriations to expand the high school plant and to rebuild the power system.
At the close of the fiscal year, the new high school buildings were nearing completion, and a contract had been let to provide new power generating units.
Congressional approval was also granted for a supplemental appropriation of $4.5 million to permit a sharp acceleration of the Department's programs to provide urgently needed services and facilities in the territory.
Further educational construction ranks high among the items included in the supplemental appropriation act.
When expended, these funds are expected to provide space in school for every child in American Samoa.
Other construction included in the supplemental appropriation are road improvements, repairs to government facilities, such as docks, improvements to the water system and other' utilities, and reconstruction of certain medical facilities.
At the same time, a vigorous program is underway to develop a productive and self-sustaining tourist industry based not only on the islands' scenie beauty, but also on expansion and development of recreational resources.
Tourism, as well as other economic progress, is expected to be enhanced by completion next year of a modern jet airport, on which construction was accelerated in 1961.
Improvement and diversification of agriculture has also been started and a deep-sea fishery training program for Samoans is showing encouraging results.
Meanwhile, economic development by private capital is not being overlooked.
Negotiations are underway for the construction of a hotel to accommodate the tourist industry, and plans are being developed for possible location of a coconut processing plant in the territory.
The provision of adequate public utilities and services is expected to lead to further use of Samoa's economic resources.
The sharply increased appropriation requests of this Administration have been designed to bring lagging economic and social development up to the levels reached to date in the political field.
An important milestone in political development was the election of the lower house of the Legislature by secret ballot, followed in 1960 by the drafting of a Constitution defining the powers of the territorial government and giving the Legislature certain legislative powers in place of its previous advisory functions.
This effort toward new progress in American Samoa is being matched in the other farflung areas for which the Department has responsibility in the Kennedy Adminstration's determined efforts to raise and expand resource horizons wherever and whenever possible.
In addition to Samoa, the Department's responsibilities extend from the Virgin Islands in the Caribbean to Guam and the Trust Territory of the Pacifie Islands in the western Pacific.
Actually, the most important resource in these areas is the people themselves, a total of some 196,000 persons living on specks of land aggregating little more than 1,100 square miles.
The task of economic and political development is infinitely varied, with peoples living in a thoroughly American society in Guam and the Virgin Islands at one end of the spectrum and with some peoples on remote islands of the Trust Territory still living much as they did in the middle of the last century.
But, regardless of location or current standard of living, the future depends upon today's and tomorrow's use and development of the resources of each territory, however presently limited.
In each offshore area revitalized resource programs of agricultural improvement and economic diversification have been inaugurated or are being planned for the months ahead.
In the Virgin Islands, as in other territorial areas, no minerals have been found in commercial quantities.
The economic backbone of the islands is the tourist industry and related recreational facilities.
An accelerated program in underway to expand and develop the tourist economy on a year-round basis.
A serious shortage of potable water and electric power, which has plagued the islands for many years, will be alleviated early in the calendar year 1962 with the completion of a water distillation plant with its electric power by-product.
A stepped up agricultural program has been inaugurated and farmers are being encouraged to raise more foodstuffs in order that the islands may be more self-sustaining.
Meanwhile, a reorganized Virgin Islands Department of Commerce is working toward diversification of the business and industrial life of the islands.
Since World War II, Guam has depended on a single industry— defense and defense-related activities.
Recognizing the necessity to broaden the base of the island's economy, the Department is working rapidly toward development of an export trade program, industrial expansion, and an agricultural and fishery resource program.
At the same time, the homesteading of government lands for the development of privately-owned farms is being encouraged.
The Trust Territory of the Pacific, with its more than 2,000 widely scattered islands and its greatly varied cultural groups, presents challenging problems in resource conservation and development.
The people of the Territory are being encouraged to vitalize the economy by the expansion of both subsistence and export agriculture; the development of new marketable products to lessen the dependence upon copra (the single major export product) ; the development of commercial fishing; and the establishment of boatbuilding enterprises for fishing and transport.
While spectacular progress in these widely scattered islands cannot be expected, it can be seen from the developments outlined here that the Territories have by no means been overlooked or neglected in the press toward full resource use and conservation.
Many and varied programs are underway, and momentum is rapidly being gained.
In comparison to the vast comparable resource programs being undertaken in the continental United States, these actions may seem minute.
But to the people of the islands they are far more than that—they represent tomorrow's hope.
THE AssIsTANT SECRETARY for Water and Power Development acts for the Secretary in implementing this area of the Department's program.
He exercises secretarial supervision and direction over the Office of Saline Water, Bureau of Reclamation, Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, and Southwestern Power Administration.
Largest and oldest of these agencies is the Bureau of Reclamation.
It constructs water-use projects primarily for the reclamation of arid and semiarid lands in the West.
It also markets electric power from projects built by itself and the Corps of Engineers in the 17 western States, exclusive of the Bonneville Power Administration's area, and operates high voltage transmission systems.
Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration and Southwestern Power Administration are strictly power marketing agencies.
Along with the Bureau of Reclamation they market all electric power generated from federally-built water resource development projects and facilities.
Bonneville's market area, in which it also operates an extensive high-voltage transmission system, is a four-State area of the Pacific Northwest.
Southeastern sells power in southeast States and Southwestern Power Administration in the central southwest States.
The latter also operates a high-voltage transmission system.
2 Capacity' in Corps of Engineers projects.
1. Preference in power sales shall be given public agencies and cooperatives.
2. Domestic and rural consumers shall have priority over other consumers in the disposal of power.
3. Power shall be sold at the lowest possible rates consistent with sound business principles.
4. Power disposal shall be such as to encourage widespread use to prevent monopolization.
The Office of Saline Water conducts programs to develop low-cost methods of converting saltwater from both the sea and ground to fresh water.
It builds and operates plants to test various processes.
The first of five authorized plants was completed and put into operation at Freeport, Tex., during fiscal 1961 and ground was broken for a second plant at Webster, S.Dak.
Certain defense functions dealing with electric power have been delegated to the Secretary by the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization.
These responsibilities are discharged by the Assistant Secretary through direction of the Defense Electric Power Administration.
Under this program a field organization stands ready to handle specifie postattack power problems.
It is made up of 16 power areas, each headed by a director with a deputy and an alternate.
Power liaison personnel have been appointed to each of the eight OCDM regional offices, designated for each state and most of the local civil defense offices throughout the Nation.
The Assistant Secretary conducted numerous conferences in Washington and in the field on power marketing problems and irrigation matters, with water and power consumer groups, congressional delegations and representatives of industry and local interests.
He testified before congressional committees and appeared before interagency groups.
Of particular significance was the appointment of a five-man departmental task force to study the proposed Pacific Northwest-Pacific Southwest extra high voltage transmission intertie.
The supplemental power supply program in the Missouri River Basin was extended through the navigation season 1965.
During the year the Office of Assistant Secretary reviewed 44 reports of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, primarily for flood control and navigation improvements; 43 Federal Power Commission applications for permits and licenses to build hydroelectric projects; and 59 Department of Agriculture watershed work plans.
START oF CoNsTRuCTIoN on seven new dams in the West highlighted a year of achievement in water resource planning and development by the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Reclamation during fiscal year 1961.
The new construction starts were initiated in five States—Whiskeytown Dam and Lewiston Dam in the Central Valley Project of California; Fontenelle Dam in the Seedskadee Project of Wyoming; Crawford Dam in the Smith Fork Project and Lemon Dam in the Florida Project in Colorado; Yellowtail and Merritt Dams in the Missouri River Basin in Montana and Nebraska.
Under its planning and construetion program for the fiscal year 1961, the Bureau of Reclamation continued to develop water and land resources in the 17 contiguous Western States, Alaska, and Hawaii.
An investment of about $230 million was added to the Bureau’s $3.5 billion investment in western projects through completion of dams, powerplants, irrigation canals, pumping plants, electrical transmission lines, and other wealth-creating facilities of benefit to the entire nation.
Construction completed during the year added more than 682,000 acre-feet of storage capacity in new Reclamation project reservoirs, 48,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity, 462 miles of canals and related water conveyances and distribution struetures, and 558 miles of high-voltage backbone transmission lines.
These are listed in table 2 of the appendix.
Operation and maintenance of irrigation facilities during the year related to 196 storage or regulating reservoirs, 120 diversion dams, and carriage, pumping, and distribution facilities of irrigation water to almost 8.2 million acres of fertile farm land, comprising 128,224 farms on which 525,000 persons resided.
The harvest of crops on irrigated farms in Reclamation projects during the 1960 crop vear exceeded $1 billion for the second successive year.
The crops grossing a record total return of $1,157,528,693 were harvested from 6,899,711 acres in the 17 contiguous Western States, making an average return per acre of $167.76, also a new record.
Only a negligible portion of this production was in crops in surplus supply.
Details of this production are shown in tables 7 and 8.
The 177 recreation areas on Reclamation projects received 24.3 million visitor days of use in 1960.
These multipurpose water recreation attractions included 7,000 miles of reservoir shoreline and 1.4 million acres of water surface area.
Municipal and industrial water usage increased 37 percent over the 1959 usage, to reach a total consumption of 397 billion gallons.
This water is marketed by 90 contracting entities which provide water to more than 200 communities and major industrial users.
The cities and towns served contained 8,778,150 persons.
Reclamation project towns and cities continued to absorb project lands in their growth.
In 1960 the acreage thus urbanized reached 181,543 acres, up 13,436 acres since 1959.
During the fiscal year, Bureau project planning technicians were engaged in the investigation and planning of proposed projects and units of projects throughout the West.
Surveys for comprehensive water resource development were underway in ten river basins in the West, including one subbasin of the Missouri River Basin.
A highlight of the extensive Bureau research program was the performance, in cooperation with other agencies, of full-scale evaporation reduction tests at Sahuarò Lake near Phoenix, Ariz., and the preliminary work for mid-1961 tests at Cachuma Reservoir, Calif.
The Bureau marketed hydroelectric power produced at 47 Federal powerplants, which had a gross revenue during fiscal 1961 of $72,743,347.
The Bureau itself operates 42 powerplants with an installed capacity of 5,199,550 kilowatts.
During the fiscal year, the total value of all contracts awarded amounted to nearly $171 million, comprising more than 700 separate contracts for construction, materials, equipment, and supplies.
Of this, construction contracts accounted for about $137 million, or 80 percent.
As shown in table 1 in the appendix, 36 major construction and supply contracts exceeding $1 million were awarded during the fiscal year.
Approximately 255 construction contracts having a value of more than $77 million were completed during the year.
There were 200 construction contracts in force at the end of the year with a total value of about $438 million.
To assist in the overall government effort, ordered by President Kennedy to improve economic conditions in depressed areas, an accelerated work program was initiated in February 1961 to speed up the preparation of designs and specifications for impending contracts for construction and equipment.
This acceleration was aimed at awarding all contracts possible before June 30, 1961, and affected a large number of construction and operating projects throughout the West.
Procurement contracts for supplies and equipment were moved up as much as 2 years due to the expedited operations initiated to improve the national economy.
Several important supply contracts were negotiated with manufacturers in areas of heavy unemployment under a set-aside procedure established in accordance with the President's program of aiding such areas.
A total of 123 construction specifications, 141 major supply invitations, and 199 minor procurement invitations were issued in fiscal year 1961.
This was 32 more construction specifications, 83 more major supply invitations, and 112 more minor procurement invitations than during the previous year.
This increased accomplishment was mainly due to the accelerated design and procurement program and represented a greater record than that accomplished during recent years.
There were 75 invitations (45 major supply, 30 minor procurement) set aside for bidding only by small business firms during the fiscal vear.
This number of set-asides was greater than at any time since the program was begun.
By comparison, only 18 invitations were set aside during the 1960 and 48 during the 1959 fiscal years.
The handling of bids for materials involving identical bids was a subiect of national interest during the year, and the Bureau compiled and submitted a large quantity of information to the Antitrust Division, Department of Justice, in connection with 20 grand jury indictments of firms manufacturing various electrical items.
Reports are being furnished for submittal to the Justice Department, on a continuing basis, for types of equipment involved in the 20 indictments.
Also on a continuing basis, photostat copies are made of original contract documents involving the electrical equipment items covered by the indictments.
The projects, staffed with Bureau technical personnel in cooperation with the International Cooperation Administration, are located in the Helmand Valley in Afghanistan and in the Blue Nile River Basin in Ethiopia.
In addition, the Bureau dispatched 18 of its own specialists to 13 foreign countries for short-term assistance details, and provided in-service training for 356 visiting students, technicians and water resource officials from 34 countries.
Further details of the varied program of the Bureau of Reclamation are provided in the following sectional report on fiscal 1961 activities.
The “Statistical Appendix to the Annual Report of the Commissioner” contains complete annual and cumulative data on the Bureau's irrigation, municipal water and power accomplishments, measured in both dollars and physical units, together with related investigations, construction, operation and administration information.
On the East Unit, Greater Wenatchee division, of the Chief Joseph Dam project in Washington, construction which started in January 1961 on a river pumping plant, booster pumping plant, and a 2-milliongallon reservoir to raise 76 cubic feet per second of water from the Columbia River was about 20 percent complete.
In the Columbia Basin construction of the Royal Branch Canal laterals in Block 83 was completed in July 1960, except for pumping units which were returned to the factory for retesting and correction.
These were reinstalled in April 1961.
The West Canal Lateral System in Block 88 was completed in June 1961.
Construction of the Hope Valley and Frenchman Hills pumping plants for the West Canal Lateral System in Block 80 was about 90 percent complete at the end of the fiscal year.
The lateral system in Block 80 of the West Canal Laterals was also about 90 percent complete.
In Oregon, the earthfill Prineville Dam, Crooked River project, was completed except for installation of the elevator in the outlet works gate shaft.
Construction of the Crooked River Diversion Canal and headworks was essentially completed at the year's end.
Construction of the Ochoco Relift and Barnes Butte pumping plants, started in August 1960, was about 90 percent completed.
The first section of the distribution canal was constructed during the year.
Enlargement of Emigrant Dam, Rogue River basin project, Oreg.
The South Fork, Daley Creek, and Grizzly Creek collection canal system and diversion dams were completed.
Other construction completed included major structures for the East Lateral rehabilitation and new structures for the Ashland Lateral rehabilitation.
The fish screen structure for Hyatt Prairie Dam and rehabilitation of the Oak Street Diversion Dam and first section of Talent Lateral were also completed.
Rehabilitation of the second section of the Talent Lateral was nearly completed at the end of the fiscal year in less than half of the contract time.
In Montana, installation of acoustical treatment to reduce the noise level in the turbine gallery of the Hungry Horse powerplant was accomplished in May 1961.
In the American River division of the Central Valley project of California, the El Dorado Main Lateral System, started in February 1961, was about 15 percent complete at the end of June, in 30 percent of the contract time.
In Central Valley's Friant division, construction of the Tea Pot Dome Water District Lateral 99.4 and sublaterals was completed.
Construction of the Stone Corral Irrigation District Lateral System, started in April 1961, was about 20 percent complete at the end of June.
Construction of part 1 extension of the Madera Distribution System, started in February, was about 40 percent complete.
Construction of the Corning Canal pumping plant in the Sacramento River division was completed.
On the Trinity River division the 10.7-mile-long Clear Creek tunnel was holed through at the end of July 1960.
Placing of concrete lining in the invert of the tunnel.was completed and placement of arch lining was started.
At the end of June 1961, work was about 96 percent complete in 90 percent of the contract time.
Construction of Trinity Dam was essentially completed in October 1960, except for the outlets works and the penstock installation.
The outlet works stilling basin was completed in May, the control valves installed, and the anchor block and foundation for the control house completed.
The dam was 97 percent complete in 85 percent of the contract time at the end of the fiscal year.
Construction of the Trinity powerplant building (prime contract) which was started in August 1960, was about 80 percent complete at the year's end in 60 percent of the contract time.
Clearing of two areas of the Trinity Reservoir was completed and the third area was about 90 percent complete at the fiscal year end.
Tunnel No. 2 of the Spring Creek Power Conduit was holed through in June 1961.
Excavation of tunnel No. 1 was about 60 percent complete.
The surge tank excavation was about 75 percent complete.
Construction of the Spring Creek powerplant (prime contract) was started in 1960 and was about 36 percent complete at the end of June, slightly ahead of schedule.
The tailrace tunnel was holed through in April.
Construction of the Clear Creek powerplant was started in August 1960.
By the end of June the work was about 50 percent complete in 40 percent of contract time.
Construction of Whiskeytown Dam was started in September 1960 and had reached 30 percent completion by the end of June.
At Lewiston Dam, the Trinity River was diverted through an old existing placer mine diversion tunnel in March 1961 to get this job off to a fast start.
The foundation was excavated and foundation grouting well advanced and placement of embankment started.
The fish hatchery outlet works and river outlet works were completed.
The entire job was about 18 percent complete in 22 percent of contract time at the end of June.
On the Klamath project, Oregon and California, six contracts for pumping plants, lateral systems, and drains were in progress during the year in the sump No. 2 and 3 areas of the Tule Lake division.
All except two were completed by the end of June.
In Nevada, construction of Prosser Creek Dam in the Washoe project was shut down for the winter from early November until mid-April.
At the end of June 1961, work was about 43 percent complete in 61 percent of the contract time.
Concrete for the diversion stage of the outlet works was completed in May and foundation grouting essentially completed in June.
On the Weber Basin project, Utah, construction of the second stage embankment for Willard Dam was continued, except for winter shutdown, and by the end of June 1961 was nearly 80 percent complete.
Pipeline and reservoir construction for the North Davis laterals, unit 1, of the Davis Aqueduct lateral system was started in September and was about 97 percent complete at the end of June.
Pipeline and structures for the West Farmington lateral system were started in January and were nearly complete at the end of the fiscal year.
Work on the Provo.
River project, Utah, was mainly concerned with construction of dikes and revision of the Provo River channel, with one project completed in June and three others continuing until later in the year.
At the Hoover powerplant, Boulder Canyon project, field erection was about 80 percent complete for the 17th and final generator and about 65 percent complete for the turbine and electrical work at the end of June.
On the Colorado River front work and levee system project, construction of Gila River Pilot Channel from the Gila River siphon to the Colorado River was started in October 1960, and completed the following February.
Construction of the companion main outlet drain was started in January and by the end of June was about 75 percent complete, well ahead of schedule.
Engineers pull lanyard releasing 1-millionth cubic yard of concrete into Glen Canyon Dam.
The Fort Thornburgh Diversion Dam, Steinaker Feeder Canal, and Rock Point Canal extension were started in July 1960, and completed in May 1961.
Construction of the Steinaker Service Canal, started in April 1961, was about 20 percent complete by the end of June.
In Wyoming construction of Government camp facilities for Fontenelle Dam of the Seedskadee project was started in May 1961.
The $7,917,000 contract for construction of Fontenelle Dam was awarded in June 1961.
Approximately 165,000 cubic yards of concrete were in place at the Flaming Gorge Dam, Colorado River storage project, in northeastern Utah.
Excavation of the spillway tunnel was completed in May.
The entire contract was about 47 percent complete at the end of the fiscal year in 60 percent of the contract time.
Work started at the Vernal end of the Flaming Gorge-Vernal section of the 85-mile-long Flaming Gorge-Vernal-Rangely 138-kv transmission line.
Work will proceed on the 119-mile-long Rangely-Oak Creek 115-kv transmission line as soon as the contractor procures materials.
The 1-millionth cubic yard of concrete was placed in Glen Canyon Dam, in northern Arizona, early in May 1961.
By the end of June a total of 1,250,000 cubic yards had been placed.
Concrete lining had been placed in all but the upper 100 feet of the left spillway tunnel raise and preparations were made for starting lining of the right spillway tunnel raise.
Concrete placing was essentially completed to the base of the superstructure for Unit Bay 1 of the powerplant and superstructure structural steel has been erected.
The other seven unit bays, service bay and machine shop were in various stages approaching that of Unit Bay 1.
The entire contract was about 53 percent complete at the end of June 1961 in 62 percent of the contract time.
The construction of the temporary tourist shelter on the left abutment was completed in June 1961.
Construction of Navajo Dam, on the San Juan River in New Mexico, was about 84 percent complete at the end of June in 63 percent of the contract time.
The 20-millionth cubic yard of embankment now in place represents about 75 percent of the total required.
The outlet works and auxiliary outlet works are complete except for second stage concrete.
The spillway is complete except for the crest structure and inlet.
A contract for relocation of the D&RGW Railroad and county roads in the reservoir area was started in November 1960 and was nearly completed at the end of June 1961 in less than half the allotted time.
Construction of the first section of the main canal in the Hammond project, participating project of the Colorado River storage project, in New Mexico, was started in August 1960 and was completed in June 1961.
Construction of the Hammond Diversion Dam was started in April 1961 and was about 15 percent complete at the end of the fiscal year.
Construction of the Hammond pumping plant was started in June.
The embankment for Paonia Dam in the Paonia project of Colorado was nearly completed at the end of the fiscal year.
The entire work was about 98 percent complete in 90 percent of contract time.
The reservoir area clearing was completed in December 1960.
On the Smith Fork project in Colorado, construction of Crawford Dam was started in October 1960, and work at the end of June was mainly concerned with drilling the outlet works tunnel and placing the conerete lining preparatory to diversion.
The work was about 35 percent complete at the end of the fiscal year and just about on schedule.
On the Collbran project of western Colorado the first and second sections of the Southside Canal were completed.
The Leon Creek and Park Creek Diversion Dams and Leon Creek Feeder Canal were also completed.
Work on the Bonham and Cottonwood pipelines was far behind schedule, which could cause serious delays in operation of the Molina powerplants.
At the end of June the work was less than 70 percent complete in 90 percent of the contract time.
The contractor was instructed to increase his work force and requirements to insure completion in accordance with the contract.
Construction of the Upper Molina and Lower Molina powerplants and penstocks was over 90 percent complete in 96 percent of the contract time.
The powerplant structures are virtually complete and installation of equipment was in progress.
The penstock for the Lower plant was essentially completed in May and a large part of the Upper plant penstock was also completed.
On the Middle Rio Grande project, N. Mex., channelization of three reaches of the Rio Grande was in progress.
One of these was completed in September 1960, the second was nearly complete at the end of June 1961.
The third was in process of clearing right-of-way and stockpiling jetty materials.
Rehabilitation of older irrigation units in the Belen, Albuquerque and Socorro areas was in progress on seven jobs all of which were completed in the nonirrigation season between October 1960 and March 1961.
Work on Twin Buttes Dam, the San Angelo project, Tex., reached about 55 percent completion in 38 percent of contract time at the end of June 1961.
Nearly 111 million cubic yards of embankment had been placed of the 21 million cubic yards required.
Clearing of the Twin Buttes Reservoir is underway and about 20 percent complete, the railroad relocation completed, and a contract was awarded for the 16-mile main canal.
In the Fort Cobb division of the Washita Basin project, Okla., construction of a district office building was completed in March.
Construction of remote control and telemetering facilities for the Anadarko Aqueduet was about half completed at the end of the fiscal year.
In the Foss division, construction of Foss Dam was completed in March 1961.
Construction of the 50-mile Foss aqueduct, including Clinton, Bessie, and Cordell laterals under a contract awarded in 1960, was about 30 percent complete in 42 percent of the contract time at the fiscal year end.
Clearing of the Foss Reservoir was completed in April.
Construction of Foss pumping plants Nos. 1, 2, and 3 was started in November 1960 and, by the end of June, was about 25 percent complete.
Construction of the Foss district office building was started in November 1960 and completed in March 1961.
In the Bighorn Basin division, Missouri River project, Wyo., Anchor Dam on the Owl Creek Unit was completed in October 1960, and grouting of the contraction joints was completed in May 1961.
Remedial action is being studied on water escapement in the reservoir area.
In the Lower Bighorn division, the first work in connection with Yellowtail Dam, Mont., was started in November 1960.
The prime contract for construction of the dam was awarded in April 1961.
By the end of June, the contractor had moved in a large amount of equipment, and camp and construction facilities and work roads were being constructed.
In the Three Forks division, Missouri River Basin project, relocation of 15 miles of Union Pacific Railroad for the future Clark Canyon Dam and reservoir, in the East Bench Unit, was started, and, by the end of June, was about 60 percent completed in 40 percent of the contract time.
In the Transmission division, Missouri River Basin project, the Fort Peck-Dawson County leg of the 310-mile-long Fort Peck-Dawson County-Bismarck 230-kv transmission line had been completed in June 1961; the remaining Dawson County-Bismarck section was completed in October 1960.: Foundations and towers for the 100-milelong Bismarck-Jamestown 230-kv transmission line No. 2 were completed in February 1961.
Stringing of conductor and overhead ground wire on this line was completed in June 1961.
Foundations and towers for the 84-mile-long Jamestown-Fargo 230-kv transmission line No. 2 were about 95 percent complete, as of June 1961, in 83 percent of the contract time.
Field work on foundations and towers for the 136-mile-long Garrison-Jamestown 230-kv transmission line was about 30 percent complete in 50 percent of the contract time with foundation work in progress and tower steel being erected.
Construction of the 114-mile-long Garrison-Minot-Rugby 115-kv transmission line was started in July 1960.
The section erossing the Snake Creek Reservoir-Garrison Reservoir embankment was completed; the remainder was about 95 percent complete at the end of June 1961 in 75 percent of the contract time.
Construction of the 110-mile-long Jamestown-Grand Forks 115-kv transmission line No. 1 was about 40 percent complete in 75 percent of the contract time by the end of June 1961.
Tornadic winds in North Dakota on July 10, 1960, blew down 12 steel towers of the Jamestown-Fargo 230-kv transmission line No. 1.
Reconstruction was completed within that month using an emergency contract.
Construction of Stages 03 and 04 additions to the Fargo substation was completed in November 1960.
Construction of the Stage 04 additions to the Jamestown substation was complete at the end of June 1961 except for installation of Government-furnished transformers.
Stages 03 and 04 additions at the Bismarck Substation were completed in May 1961.
Construction of foundations and towers for the 57-mile-long Oahe-Fort Thompson 230-ky transmission line was about 80 percent complete in 60 percent of the contract time by the end of June 1961.
Field work on the foundations and towers for the single-circuit transmission line approaches at the Oahe and Fort Randall switchyards was started in Mav 1961.
The contractor started stringing operations in June for the addition of second circuit conductors on the 337 miles of Fort Thompson-Huron-Watertown, Fort Randall-Sioux City, and Fort Randall-Fort Thompson 230-kv transmission lines.
The contract was awarded in May 1961 for stringing second circuit conductors on 74 miles of previously constructed Watertown-Granite Falls 230-kv transmission lines.
Construction of the 213-mile-long Sioux City-Spencer and Sioux City-Denison-Creston 161-kv transmission lines was started in April 1961.
Construction of Stage 04 additions to the Granite Falls substation and Stage 03 additions to the Tyndall Substation were both completed in September 1960.
Stage 03 additions to the Huron Substation were about 95 percent complete at the end of June.
Construction of the Fort Thompson substation, Stage 01, was started in July 1960 and had reached 70 percent completion, about on schedule.
Work had been started on Stage 03 additions to the Rapid City substation, Stage 04 additions to the Sioux City substation, and Stages 08 and 09 additions to the Watertown substation.
A contract was awarded in April 1961 for construction of a multichannel microwave radio communications system to link all Missouri River Basin powerplants and substations in the South Dakota power system.
In the Bostwiek division, Missouri River Basin project, construction of the last section of the White Rock extension canal was completed in April 1961, to bring to a close major construction in this area extending over a period of 12 years.
In the Frenchman-Cambridge division, Missouri River Basin project, reconstruction of the last section of the old Culbertson Canal and construction of the first section of the Culbertson extension canal and lateral system was completed.
The second section of the Culbertson extension canal and lateral system was about 95 percent complete at the end of June 1961 in about 68 percent of the contract time.
Construction of Red Willow Dam in Nebraska was started in June 1960, and had reached about 35 percent completion by the end of June 1961 in 60 percent of the contract time.
The outlet works was about 90 percent complete.
Initial clearing of the reservoir was started in June 1961.
In the Middle Loup division, Missouri River Basin project, construction of Sherman Dam in the Farwell Unit, Nebr., was about 80 percent complete and about on schedule.
Clearing of the Sherman Reservoir was completed.
Construction of the Arcadia Diversion Dam was started and the work was about 20 percent complete in 35 percent of the contract time at the end of June 1961.
The first section of the Sherman Feeder Canal had reached about 45 percent completion in 35 percent of contract time.
A substantial amount of canal excavation had been accomplished on the second section of the Sherman Feeder Canal and tunnel excavation started.
The work is about 30 percent complete in 35 percent of the contract time.
In the Oregon Trail division, Missouri River Basin project, the first generator in the Fremont Canyon powerplant was placed in operation in December 1960 and the second in January 1961, and all work was completed in March 1961.
Completion of the Gray Reef Dam in the same division was completed in May.
Construetion of Merritt Dam in the Sandhills division, Missouri River Basin project, was initiated in April 1961 and at the end of June was about 10 percent complete in 12 percent of the contract time.
Trinity Dam, Bureau of Reclamation's largest earth-filled structure, backs up the Trinity River in northern California.
In the Smoky Hill division, Missouri River Basin project, the modification of existing outlet works at Cedar Bluffs Dam was about 60 percent complete in 98 percent of the contract time.
Construction of the Cedar Bluff Canal was started in 1961, and is about 10 percent complete in 30 percent of contract time.
Construction of the second section of Cedar Bluff Canal was started in June.
In the Solomon division, Missouri River Basin project, the fourth section of the Osborne Canal was completed in April 1961.
In the Transmission division, Missouri River Basin project, construction of the 140-mile-long Kortes-Cheyenne 115-kv transmission line was completed in November 1960, and the 115-kv additions to the Cheyenne substation for terminal facilities for this line were completed in September 1960.
Construction of the 65-mile-long Cheyenne-Pine Bluffs-Sidney 115-ky transmission line was nearly complete at the end of June in 75 percent of the contract time.
Construction of the Kimball substation and 115-kv addition to the Sidney substation were both underway.
Construction of a multichannel microwave radio communications system between the Flatiron Dispatch Ofice at Loveland, Colo., and the Cheyenne substation was essentially complete at the end of June 1961.
Principal features completed on Bureau projects in fiscal year 1961 are shown in table 2.
The list includes six storage dams, seven diversion dams, and 462 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals, and drains; as well as 558 miles of transmission lines.
The Bureau continued to emphasize its safety program in the prevention of accidents through administration of sound safety practices and corrective measures to control hazards associated with heavy construction work.
Significant progress was made by reducing the contractors' overall frequency rate 16 percent below the previous year's accident rate.
The Bureau continued during the fiscal year to develop engineering designs and design standards that will produce savings in the construction, operation and maintenance of its engineering works.
This continuing effort benefited by the studies of a three-man team of Reclamation engineering specialists who visited several European countries to examine at first hand practices and procedures employed in the investigation, testing, design, and construction of concrete dams.
The importance and value of saving water otherwise lost in transit through canals is recognized.
An appraisal of research and development work in the lower-cost canal lining program showed savings to western water users of more than $20 million in the construction of irrigation canals over the past 15 years.
The search for better methods to locate and measure seepage continued.
Several new installations of buried plastic Butyl rubber sheets as a membrane to prevent seepage were installed in canals during the year.
Men and machines place and compact earth in Navajo Dam on the San Juan River in New Mexico.
Experience of the past year in the field of earth dam design brought about a better understanding of the many complex variables involved.
Special attention was concentrated on the analysis of foundation conditions from the standpoint of water retention and stability of soft foundations.
The feasibility of obtaining power from the electric field surrounding energized transmission lines was investigated.
The electrical analogy tray apparatus was used to evaluate the mutual capacitance between the various conductions and between the conductors and ground.
The techniques of noise control and the equipment necessary for detecting and analyzing noise sources in powerplants and pumping plants were studied.
Noise control is now being considered in the original design of powerplants and pumping plants to eliminate correction of the conditions after the plant is built.
Field tests on two pumping plants where water column separation could be induced demonstrated the propriety of present Bureau design policy.
Such policy calls for the design of water conduits for pumping plants so that water column separation cannot occur under any condition of operation.
During the year studies were started on the use of high strength reinforcement bars in precast reinforced concrete pipe.
The highstrength bars, a relatively new product, have a yield strength of 60,000 pounds per square inch compared to 40,000 pounds per square inch yield strength for conventional reinforcement steel.
The increasing use of precast concrete pipe in distribution systems gives great importance to this development.
A technique was developed and used for the first time at Yellowtail damsite to determine characteristics of abutment and foundation rock.
Equipment and instruments were designed and utilized to increase the knowledge on properties of rock in place.
The technique will be used at other damsites.
A new procedure in the preparation of specifications drawings showing geologic logs of drill holes released trained draftsmen for other work, increasing production.
The use of typewritten notes in lieu of machine lettering equipment is the basis of the new technique.
The altered procedure is aided by a new heat-resistant adhesive for plastic drafting film.
Studies were started on preliminary data for design of a 345-kv single-circuit, steel tower transmission line from Glen Canyon to Flagstaff to Pinnacle Peak (north of Phoenix, Ariz.).
Basic information such as conductor size and arrangement, hardware, insulation, mechanical loading assumptions, climate, and corona limitations are among the points being studied.
The transmission line will be unique for the voltage because a large percent of the length of the line will be in the 6,000- to 8,000-foot range of elevation.
To minimize operating expenses, larger powerplants are being designed, where practical, for remote supervisory control.
Current designs provide semiautomatic, pushbutton start-and-stop type controls at the Trinity, Clear Creek, and Spring Creek powerplants.
Operation of these three plants and the control of water from the Keswiek Control Center will save operating costs.
All large plants being designed by the Bureau are being provided printing annunciators.
This equipment will provide a permanent record which will give an accurate sequence when troubles occur.
Operators will be relieved of such recording duties.
Specifications for high-speed voltage regulators for generators were revised extensively to incorporate improved methods of specifying performance.
The new requirements are based on definitions of performance which appear in a proposed standard prepared by the AIEE subcommittée on excitation systems.
Through the increased use of electronic computing equipment for engineering studies, Bureau of Reclamation engineers are further relieved from many routine calculations.
Calculations were produced for such diverse engineering problems as the determination of power flows in interconnected high-voltage power systems; earthwork quantities for canals, highways, and railroads; analysis of control data for concrete and earthwork structures; design studies for dams, powerplants, pumping plants, and other structural features.
Electronic computer program studies during the fiscal year aided in the development of more advanced designs and more efficient use of engineering materials.
Studies included investigation of the development of uniform Bureauwide ADP procedures for nonexpendable movable equipment; crop census reporting; studies to determine capacities of large canals; statistical analyses of earthwork and concrete control data; structural designs of walls, slabs, and frames for powerplants and pumping plants; caleulation of deflections in concrete dams; power system average rate and repayment studies; design and analysis of structures on elastic foundations; non-linear multiple correlations; hydrology system operation studies; and calculation of loss factors for electrical power systems.
A revised procedure was developed and implemented for processing Bureauwide real property data to produce useful current information as well as that required for periodic inventory and status reports on real property.
Full-scale evaporation reduction tests were performed at Sahuaro Lake, Phoenix, Ariz., in cooperation with the Department's Geological Survey, Salt River Valley Water Users Association, U.S. Public Health Service, and the Arizona State Fish and Game Department.
A new automatic technique of applying the monolayer-forming material in melted form was employed with encouraging results.
A manual method of applying the monolayer-forming material with agricultural dusting equipment mounted on a boat also proved effective.
The Sahuaro Lake investigations showed evaporation savings of about 14 percent for over a 6-week period using a mixture of hexadecanol and octadecanol as the monolayer-forming material.
In preparation for a full-scale evaporation reduction field test during the summer months of 1961 at Cachuma Reservoir, Calif., prevailing climatic conditions at the reservoir were studied and further research and development on the automatic dispensers were carried out.
Twelve dispensers were built and installed at the reservoir.
The Cachuma investigations are in cooperation with the Geological Survey, Cachuma Operation and Maintenance Board, Santa Barbara County Department of Parks, and the City and State Health Departments.
Aerial applications of the monolayer-forming material were field tested at Utah Lake in a cooperative program with the Utah State University.
Preliminary studies were highly encouraging for this method of applying monolayers to large reservoirs.
Evaporation losses in the 17 Western States total about 25 million acre-feet annually.
Concrete containing certain types of aggregate when exposed in a moist environment to freezing-thawing conditions is sometimes affected by surface deterioration in the form of popouts, scaling, and spalling.
On large projects remedial measures such as heavy media separation are feasible economically, and they are being presently used for aggregates at Glen Canyon and Flaming Gorge Dams.
On smaller projects, cost would preclude such treatment, and to protect the concrete surface from deterioration, other means such as surface treatment may be the answer.
Investigations of such treatments as epoxy resin, linseed oil, and silicones were started to determine their effectiveness in reducing freezing-thawing deterioration of concrete.
Preliminary research on improving asphaltic concrete for lining canals and reservoirs and facing dams showed that an epoxy-resin additive contributes to a higher quality mixture, exhibiting considerably greater compressive and tensile strengths and stability after aging.
Other investigations into the performance of asphaltic concrete indicate that asbestos fibers produce a pronounced increase in tensile strength and stability.
By using the finer fibers (low-cost waste screenings), a watertight material can be obtained.
A new method for tensile testing of 4-inch-diameter asphaltic concrete test cylinders was developed to facilitate study of the correlation between compressive and tensile strengths.