Three times in this century—at intervals spaced some 30 years apartAmerica has faced a grave threat to the abundance and adequacy of its natural resources—and consequently to the future of the Nation itself.
On each occasion, the necessary strong hand of leadership has been found to meet the threat through bold conservation actions—and we have forged ahead into new eras of progress.
The conservation movement had its beginnings in the early 1900's after we as a people had waged a ruthless 'hundred years' war" on the resources of this continent in the mistaken belief that nature's bounty knew no limits.
Only a few men—John Wesley Powell, Carl Schurz, John Muir and a handful more—recognized the danger signals in the burned forests, the silt-choked streams and disappearing wildlife, but they found a ready champion in the young President who had just taken office—Theodore Roosevelt.
TR—the first great conservationist President—gathered about him such lieutenants as Gifford Pinchot and moved swiftly to put an end to the squandering of our national birthright.
He provided our forests and water resources with systematic programs of protection, renewal and development and took action to reserve for all of the people much of the remaining land suitable for forests, parks, and refuges for wildlife.
It was largely on the momentum of this work that we moved forward in the conservation of natural resources until the 1930's when the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl served unmistakable notice that we were headed again toward resource bankruptcy unless we took further action—and promptly—to repair the damage of the past.
Again—fortunately for America—there was leadership equal to the task.
Among the principal programs of Franklin D. Roosevelt's first term were conservation programs that constituted a massive effort to rescue and reclaim and develop our fundamental resource base of land and water.
Through such action programs as the TVA, the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Rural Electrification Administration, and many others, the threat was averted and a foundation built for future progress in essential natural resource programs.
Today we face a new crisis affecting the whole broad field of our natural resources—a crisis which, though perhaps not so dramatically apparent to all as that of the 1930's is nonetheless as real and dangerous.
The conservation crisis of the 1960's has resulted neither from ignorance nor folly, but from our very success as a Nation—the rush of progress symbolized by our burgeoning cities and thriving industry, and hastened greatly by expanding population.
The proportions of the developing emergency were clearly seen by President Kennedy when he took office in January 1961.
In the resource field, predictions of future use have been consistently understated. But even under conservative projections, we face a future of critical shortages and handicaps. By the year 2000, a United States population of 300 million—nearly doubled in 40 years—will need far greater supplies of farm products, timber, water, minerals, fuels, energy, and opportunities for outdoor recreation. Present projections tell us that our water use will double in the next 20 years; that we are harvesting our supply of high-grade timber more rapidly than the development of new growth; that too much of our fertile topsoil is being washed away; that our minerals are being exhausted at increasing rates; and that the Nation's remaining undeveloped areas of great natural beauty are being rapidly preempted for other uses."
The President's message made plain his conviction that a new conservation effort of Rooseveltian proportions was urgently required to assure an adequate resource base for the fuțure, both immediate and distant.
Wbile the frst major additions to our outdoor recreational areas in 16 years bring new opportunity to millions of Americans, there still remain significant areas, such as the proposed Canyonlands National Park, which should be preserved for posterity.
Symbolic of the seriousness with which he views the problem was his call for a White House Conference on Conservation to be held in Washington—the first since the days of Theodore Roosevelt.
Share our conservation know-how and conservation ethic with men everywhere.
Actually, the White House Conference reaffirmed, rather than enunciated, the goals of the Kennedy Administration's aggressive new approach to the Nation's conservation problems.
From the beginning of civilization, .every nation's basic wealth and progress has stemmed in large measure from its natural resources. This Nation has been, and is now, especially fortunate in the blessings we have inherited. Our entire society rests upon—and is dependent upon—our water, our land, our forests, and our minerals. . .. Wise investment in a resource program today will return vast dividends tomorrow, and failures to act now may be opportunities lost forever. Our country has been generous with us in this regard—and we cannot now ignore her needs for future development."
Acting under the spur of this leadership, the people of the United States—both through the Congress and in independent State and local actions—have joined together in increasing numbers to make possible an unprecedented advance in conservation progress, particularly in the vital area of water resource use and development, and in decisions to preserve, while there is yet time, as much as possible of the outdoor heritage which traditionally has played a deeply significant role in shaping our character and destiny as a Nation.
In any consideration of future resource needs, we are confronted with one basic and sobering fact: assurance of an adequate supply of usable water is rapidly becoming one of the most pressing problems not only in the United States but throughout the world.
Our Nation's progress is reflected in the history of our great river systems.
The water that courses through our rivers and streams holds the key to full national development.
Uncontrolled, it wipes out homes, lives and dreams, bringing disaster in the form of floods; controlled, it is an effective artery of transportation, a boon to industrial development, a source of beauty and recreation, and the means of turning arid areas into rich and versatile cropland.
In no resource field are conservation principles more applicable.
By 1980, it is estimated, our national water needs will nearly double—by the end of the century they will triple.
But the quantity of water which nature supplies will remain almost constant.
The Department and the State of California are jointly constructing the $515 million San Luis unit of the Central Valley project, northwest of Fresno, Calif.
Under the agreement, California will meet 55 percent of the construction cost of the joint facilities, shown here.
Our goal, therefore, is to have sufficient water sufficiently clean in the right place at the right time to serve the range of human and industrial needs .
This Administration adheres to the policy enunciated in my natural resources message of last year that our available water supply will be used to provide maximum benefits for all purposes— hydroelectric power, irrigation and reclamation, navigation, recreation and wildlife, and municipal and industrial water supply. These diverse uses and our future needs require thoughtful preservation and full development of our national water resources."
San Juan-Chama and Navajo Indian irrigation projects in Colorado and New Mexico—the first time in the 60-year history of the Department's Bureau of Reclamation that Congress has approved two water resource projects of this magnitude in a single year.
2. The Reclamation program reached its highest level in history with total expenditures of $347 million for all activities in fiscal year 1962.
3. Congressional approval was given to Federal participation in the Delaware River Basin development program on a partnership basis with the States of Delaware, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania.
5. Congressional authorization of a $75 million expenditure through fiscal years 1962-1967 made possible a considerably accelerated research and development program by the Department's Office of Saline Water.
These actions represent only the major developments in two years of rapid progress in water resource conservation.
We cannot delude ourselves," President Kennedy told the Congress in 1961.
We must understand our resources problems and face up to them."
It required little time to indicate that we, as a people, were prepared to follow this advice.
One of the clearest evidences of the new progressive viewpoint came with approval of Fryingpan-Arkansas, a Reclamation project which, prior to 1962.
Designed to divert surplus water from the western slope of the Rocky Mountains to the water-deficient eastern slope, the project, through use of a transmountain tunnel, will help irrigate the Arkansas River Basin and give drinking water and electricity to an area covering more than half the State of Colorado.
More specifically, it contemplates construction of storage and water carriage works to provide supplemental irrigation water for 280,000 acres of presently irrigated land in the Arkansas River Valley in Colorado: it will supply water to meet expanding needs for municipal, domestic, and industrial water on both sides of the Continental Divide, reduce flood damage along the Arkansas River east of Pueblo, generate annually about 500 million kilowatt-hours of hydroelectric power, and make significant contributions to recreation and to the conservation and development of fish and wildlife.
President Kennedy receives applause during his address at Pueblo, Colo., in August 1962 at ceremonies commemorating the authorization of the $171 million Fryingpan-Arkansas reclamation project in Colorado.
This is an investment in the future of this country," President Kennedy said, "an investment that will repay large dividends. Its water impounded at over 9,000 feet will drop through an unprecedented seven powerplants to produce electricity for homes and factories and farms, and there will be new water for new people and new industries. Fryingpan-Arkansas is an excellent example of full development of our water resources to provide maximum benefits for all of our people."
Of similar significance was legislation authorizing the initial stage of the San Juan-Chama project and the Navajo Indian irrigation project as participating units of the Colorado River storage project.
The initial stage of the San Juan-Chama project in Colorado and New Mexico will provide urgently needed additional water for lands in areas tributary to the Rio Grande that have been centers of economic distress.
It will supplement the water supply of the highly important Middle Rio Grande project, and it will provide additional water for the rapidly growing requirements of the city of Albuquerque and defense establishments of the Rio Grande Basin in New Mexico.
The Navajo Indian irrigation project provides for construction of distribution facilities to deliver water from the Navajo Reservoir, presently under construction by the Bureau of Reclamation on the San Juan River, some 150 miles across reservation lands in northwestern New Mexico to irrigate more than 110,000 acres of land.
This important project will provide economic assistance to the hardpressed Navajo Indians and will enable New Mexico to put to use a major portion of the water of the Upper Colorado River system to which it is entitled under two interstate compacts.
Another high point in Reclamation action came late in 1961 when the Department approved an agreement with the State of California for Federal construction of the $515 million Federal-State San Luis unit of the Central Valley project, northwest of Fresno, Calif.
Under the agreement, California will meet 55 percent of the construction cost of the joint facilities, representing a vital link in the State's long-range program to speed economic development through the diversion of surplus water from the north to arid southern California.
A measure of the scope of the project is shown in the fact that the Federal Government will serve some 500,000 acres of farmland in the San Joaquin Valley with irrigation water from its portion of the unit.
The Federal contribution to cost of the project will be $277 million—of which 99.9 percent will be repaid by water users.
In January 1962 the world's highest earthfill dam—Trinity—was completed 2 months ahead of schedule.
Symbolizing the giant strides in long-term Reclamation progress, the 537-foot-high dam is a major feature of the $251 million Trinity River division of the Central Valley project which also includes two major tunnels that will carry water through the mountains from Trinity River to the Sacramento River Basin; Whiskeytown Dam; and three major powerplants.
The Division is scheduled to be completed by mid-1964.
Trinity Reservoir, which began filling in 1961, will store 2½ million acre-feet of water, exceeded in California only by Shasta Lake above Shasta Dam on the Sacramento River.
The Trinity River division will increase by nearly 1½ million acre-feet the irrigation water available to the Central Valley project on which some half-million acres are now receiving water from Reclamation-constructed works.
The division's three major powerplants at Trinity Dam, Clear Creek, and Spring Creek are scheduled to go into operation in 1963, producing some 1½ billion kilowatt-hours of energy annually.
Trinity—world's bighest earthfill dam—symbolizes the giant strides in longterm Reclamation progress.
A major feature of the $251 million Trinity River division of California's Central Valley project, dam was completed in January 1962, 2 months ahead of schedule.
Trinity Dam's reservoir—covering 16,400 acres with a scenic 145- mile shoreline in heavily timbered mountains—provides California with an important recreation area.
At the same time, the Trinity River works, including a fish hatchery below Lewiston Dam, will help maintain river sports fishing as well as benefit Pacific coast commercial salmon fishing.
In total, during the 18 months beginning in January 1961, the Bureau of Reclamation advanced its water resource development programs in the 17 Western States by awarding more than 2,000 contracts at a cost of over $300 million.
Included were contracts for 13 storage dams in 10 States which when completed will provide a total reservoir capacity of 5 million acre-feet of water for irrigation, hydroelectric power, municipal and industrial water supplies, recreation, fish and wildlife, and other beneficial purposes.
While this great program is being carried on in the West, its impact on the total national economy is by no means confined to that area.
The availability of irrigation water converts the risks of dryland farming to a consistently less hazardous and more profitable farm operation.
The provision of vast new sources of hydroelectric power stimulates industrial development, modernization of rural life, and urban development.
The wealth thus produced devotes itself to the national interest through increased buying power and an expanded tax base.
In the words of President Kennedy, "Nothing could be more disastrous for this country than for people from the East to say, 'There is no benefit to us in spending our money to make this valley green.' That is the way to stand still. As one State does well, so do the others —and if one State stands still, so do all the rest."
At the same time, there is no basis for apprehension that continuing irrigation development brings more lands into agricultural production and hence intensifies the agricultural crop surplus problem.
A dominant feature of irrigation farming is diversification.
The chief products of irrigation are nutritious fruits and vegetables and meats which are not in surplus and which help sustain the health and economy of the Nation.
The seope of Reclamation's contribution in this regard may be seen in the latest annual crop reports which show that the 1961 harvest on farms irrigated by Reclamation projects exceeded the billion-dollar mark for the third successive year.
While pressing ahead with visible progress in steel and concrete, the Bureau of Reclamation since January 1961 has considerably accelerated programs of equal long-range significance in research designed to conserve existing water supplies and to develop new ways of meeting our future water needs.
An example is a program of weather-modification research which the Bureau has undertaken in cooperation with the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Weather Bureau.
Contracts have been awarded to three universities for research in support of the program, the long-range objective of which is to increase water supply in Reclamation projects through artificially induced precipitation.
Meanwhile, stepped-up field tests have resulted in encouraging advances in programs to develop practical techniques to reduce the current annual loss through evaporation of millions of acre-feet of water from storage reservoirs, and to develop effective low-cost linings to cut similar costly losses through seepage from irrigation canals.
The urgent need for action to solve our growing national water resource problems has perhaps never been more clearly pointed up than in the findings of an intensive 2-year study by the Senate Select Committee on National Water Resources completed at about the time President Kennedy began his term of office.
2. That by the year 2000, three other regions—including one east of the Mississippi—will be added to the list if water supplies are to meet demands.
In response to this and other danger signals, the President forwarded to the Congress a blueprint for the comprehensive, progressive machinery so-long needed if we are to be serious in our efforts to assure adequate water for present and future needs.
Authorize the President to create—at the request of the Governor of one or more affected States, or of the Council—a river basin water resources commission for any region, major river basin, or group of related river basins in the United States.
Provide encouragement to the States to participate fully and effectively in water and related land resource planning through a system of Federal financial assistance.
The act would require that any river basin plan take into account domestic, agricultural, energy, industrial, recreational, fish and wildlife, and other major resource conservation and development.
It would enable the Congress—within the Federal sphere of responsibility—to decide upon the many individual project developments on the basis of full information as to the overall needs and timing for basin development.
At the same time, States and local interests within their respective spheres of responsibility—would be enabled to do likewise.
With action on this far-reaching measure pending in the Congress, the Federal Government moved on another front to save valuable time in the race against the day when water of acceptable quality will not meet the needs of a large part of the United States.
With congressional approval, agreement was reached for Federal participation in the unique organizational experiment in multiplepurpose water resource management currently underway in the Delaware River basin.
The instrument for this management and development is the Delaware River Basin Commission, representing the first effort to create a form of Federal-Interstate Compact organization empowered to represent both the Federal Government and the States of Delaware, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania in planning, programing, scheduling, financing, and executing a water resource program of vital economic importance to 21 million people in this major eastern watershed.
Today, rapid and encouraging progress is being made toward launching of a development program involving a potential billiondollar investment in flood control, outdoor recreation facilities, soil conservation projects, water pollution control works, fish and wildlife management facilities, pumped storage power facilities, municipal water supply works, river regulation, and diversions of navigation facilities.
In his special conservation message to the Congress in February 1961, President Kennedy declared: '"No water resources program is of greater long-range importance—for relief not only of our shortages, but for arid nations the world over—than our efforts to find aneffective and economical way to convert water from the world's greatest, cheapest natural resources—our oceans—into water fit for consumption in the home and by industry . . . This Administration is currently engaged in redoubled efforts to select the most promising approaches to economic desalinization of ocean and brackish waters, and then focus our energies more intensively on those approaches . . . I urge the Congress to extend the current saline water conversion research program, and to increase the funds for its continuation."
Congressional response to this appeal was prompt.
Today, with a $75 million program authorized through fiscal year 1967, saline water research and development activities are moving forward at a notably quickened pace.
Demonstration plants are in operation at Freeport, Tex., Webster, S. Dak., and San Diego, Calif.
A million-gallon-a-day demonstration plant is under construction at Roswell, N. Mex., and is scheduled to go into operation in 1963.
Negotiations are underway for construction of a large freezing process pilot plant at Wrightsville Beach, N.C., to fully exploit, as rapidly as possible, this promising desalination method.
Research and development contract awards by the Department's Office of Saline Water increased from $1.2 million for the first half of fiscal 1962 to $5.6 million in the second half.
In March 1962, the Office of Saline Water transferred $365,000 to the Atomic Energy Commission for participation by the Commission's Oak Ridge National Laboratory in basic research phases of the saline water conversion program.
Thus, for the first time, the skills and capabilities of the personnel at the Oak Ridge laboratories were brought to bear on problems other than those of an atomic nature.
The agreement with AEC marked the largest single expenditure for basic research by the Office of Saline Water in its 10-year history which has seen the cost of conversion reduced from about $5 per thousand gallons to a minimum of about $1.
During the year, the benefits of saline water conversion were dramatically demonstrated in the Virgin Islands, one of the territories administered by the Department.
A saline water plant operated by the Virgin Islands Corporation was successful beyond expectations.
Drinking water formerly had to be brought into the territory by barge, at a cost of more than $3 per thousand gallons.
The saline water plant was expected to produce about 250,000 gallons daily for approximately $1.75 per thousand.
But since February of this year it has been producing about 300,000 gallons daily for $1.63 per thousand.
President Kennedy's continuing deep personal interest in the ultimate success of our saline water efforts perhaps was most clearly indicated in his address to the White House Conference on Conservation in May 1962.
In his remarks, the President said, "Our great contribution in the 1950's and 1960's, it seems to me, is applying the great discoveries of science to this question of conservation, how to get fresh water from salt water at competitive terms, a matter which can mean such an extraordinary amount to people of the West, the Southwest, and really in a sense to people all around the globe. I have felt that whatever country can do this in a competitive way will get a good deal more lasting benefit than those countries that may be even first in space."
In another significant water conservation action, the Secretaries of Health, Education, and Welfare, Agriculture, Interior, and of the Army, acting as a Water Resources Council, developed an up-to-date set of uniform standards to facilitate national progress in the formulation and evaluation of water resources projects.
In May 1962, the President approved these new policies, standards, and procedures for application by the four departments and the Bureau of the Budget.
Implementation of these standards means that for the first time full comprehensive treatment of all water and related land uses, including alternative uses, are to be given consideration in the planning and evaluation of water projects.
One of the major challenges in resource conservation lies in the orderly development and efficient utilization of energy resources to meet the Nation's electric power needs—needs which double every decade.
Modern equipment such as this helps to provide the needs of our Western States for electric power.
This is one of the many functions of Reclamation programs.
Our goal," President Kennedy has said, "is to ensure an abundance of low-cost power for all consumers—urban and rural, industrial and domestic. To achieve this, we must use more effectively all sources of fuel, find cheaper ways to harness nuclear energy, develop our hydroelectric potential, utilize presently unused heat produced by nature or as a byproduct of industrial processes, and even capture the energy of the tides where feasible."
As a first step in this approach, the President directed the Department to develop plans for the early interconnection of areas served by its hydroelectric power marketing agencies with adequate common carrier transmission lines; to plan for further nationalcooperative pooling of electric power, both public and private; and to enlarge such pooling as was then in existence.
The first result came soon afterward when the Department's Bonneville Power Administration, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and nine private and public owners of hydroelectric generating facilities signed a coordination agreement designed to produce maximum power at powerplants on Pacific Northwest rivers.
The agreement provided that storage and generating facilities would be operated in much the same manner as if all were under one ownership; it also provided for interchanges of energy and power among the signers in order to conserve water in reservoirs, and for coordination of the transmission facilities of the parties to the agreement.
This pioneering agreement, involving 65 hydroelectric plants and 13 steam plants with total installed capacity of 11.8 million kilowatts, produces an extra million or more kilowatts of firm power that would be wasted if each utility operated its hydroplants independently.
A major breakthrough toward achieving the Administration's goal of more plentiful low-cost power through the pooling of public and private facilities came after Congress, in 1961, approved construction on an all-Federal basis of the backbone transmission lines required to market the power generated by the giant five-State Colorado River storage project.
Early in 1962, the Department announced the far-reaching decision that some of the transmission lines for the Colorado River project would be built by private utilities—and thus a new era of "competitive cooperation" between public and private utilities was brought into being.
Among other significant benefits, the Colorado River decision will reduce the investment in Federal facilities by $27 million; make for more reliable delivery of Federal hydropower to preference customers at lower costs and, in turn, make the private company systems more reliable.
Additionally, it will add $77 million to the project's basin fund by the year 2042, when the 87-year payout period is completed.
Contracts have been signed between the Department and private utilities serving Utah, New Mexico, Colorado, and Wyoming for transmission of CRSP power over an interconnecting system of Federal and private power lines.
A total of about 1.2 million kilowatts will be generated at the authorized hydroelectric plants of the storage project.
Contracts have been signed between the Government and Missouri cooperatives which will assure a steady flow of electrie power to more than one million customers in that State through the pooling of generating and transmission facilities of the Federal Government, rural electric cooperatives, and private utilities.
The Department has accepted a proposal by the Basin Electric Power Cooperative Association of North Dakota to enter contract pooling arrangements with the Bureau of Reclamation, thereby making possible the establishment of a large generating plant in the lignite coalfields of North Dakota.
This action should assure the development of North Dakota's vast lignite resources and could provide the low-cost power needed for the economic development of the entire upper Missouri River Basin region.
Similar action in Colorado will provide economic stimulus to that State's coal industry.
Today in the United States, and throughout the world, we are at a "new frontier" in electricity.
Giant new generators are being built with a capacity of a million or more kilowatts, one of which alone can produce enough power to supply a city the size of Washington, D.C.
In a relatively short period of time this means the possibility of transmitting: Yukon River power to Seattle and, by displacement, to Los Angeles; mine-mouth power from West Virginia coalfields to New York and Boston, and from Dakota lignite beds to Chicago and Detroit; power flowing east and west to take advantage of time diversity; power flowing north and south for seasonal diversity; the integration of hydro and steam systems; and, most important, cheaper electricity for all consumers.
Early this year a departmental task force appointed in 1961 to study an extra-high-voltage common carrier interconnection between the Pacific Northwest and Pacific Southwest completed its investigations.
As a result of this investigation, studies of four high-voltage interties between the Pacific Northwest and other regions are presently in various stages of development.
The first of these, the Pacific Northwest-Pacific Southwest extra-high-voltage intertie to provide for an interchange of electric power between the predominantly fuel-fired electric generating plants in the Pacific Southwest and the predominantly hydroelectrie generating plants of the Pacific Northwest, is awaiting passage of preference legislation guaranteeing reciprocal regional preference to electric energy generated at Federal plants to consumers in both the Pacific Northwest and regions interconnected with the Pacific Northwest.
This intertie would reduce the amount of peaking capacity needed in the Pacific Northwest and Pacific Southwest as well as conserve the energy obtainable from water that would otherwise be spilled by Pacific Northwest hydroelectric plants during the summer months when Pacific Southwest loads hit their peak.
In addition, the use of Pacific Northwest hydroelectric power conserves supplies of coal, oil, and gas in the Pacific Southwest.
The second intertie is to provide a connection between the West Kootenay Power & Light Co. in British Columbia and the Bonneville grid at the Canadian border.
This regional intertie line is scheduled to be energized in July of 1964, with construction beginning this year.
By use of this intertie, the West Kootenay Light & Power Co. can store water in their Kootenay Lake reservoir during August and the first part of September by supplying part of its system loads with energy from Bonneville Power Administration.
A like amount of energy will be returned starting at about the middle of September.
Benefit to the Federal power system from these operations is estimated at some 53,000 kilowatts of firm power.
Meanwhile, studies of a third and fourth high-voltage intertie— between the Missouri Basin and southern Idaho and the Bonneville Power Administration system—are nearing completion.
Work is being accelerated by the Bonneville Power Administration on tests relating to high-voltage direct current transmission.
Significantly different from any tests previously undertaken in the United States, they will, in fact, provide data not yet available either here or in Europe.
While direct current transmission is used in Europe, notably in Sweden, most of it is under ground or under water.
The Bonneville tests will be performed on insulators and conductors strung on towers in a manner similar to alternating current transmission lines.
Marking the start of intensive research in this new technique, the Allis Chalmers Manufacturing Co. of Milwaukee has been awarded a $689,000 contract to build components necessary to convert regular alternating current from the Dalles Dam, on the Columbia River between Oregon and Washington, into direct current and at voltage to extremes not yet approached in this country.
Approval was given at the close of the 2nd session of the 87th Congress to construction of the world's largest atomic powerplant at Hanford, Wash., to utilize steam from the Atomic Energy Commission's new production reactor.
As a result of the action—representing a significant example of the use of an important resource which would otherwise be wasted—the Washington State public power supply system will build and operate 800,000-kilowatt generating facilities at Hanford and deliver the output to local publicly and privately owned utilities which, in turn, will exchange it with the Bonneville Power Administration for a block of firm power on a nonprofit basis.
The Hanford Act assures Pacific Northwest industries, farmers, and other consumers of a new firm power supply equal to that produced by a major dam and considerably reduces the threat of a previously anticipated regional power shortage within the next few years.
Until passage of the act, Bonneville since 1960 had been unable to offer substantial amounts of firm power to prospective industries.
Ultimate employment of up to 50,000 workers now is possible in new industries expected to be attracted by the additional source of inexpensive energy.
Congressional authorization of a $150,000 appropriation has enabled the Department to make significant progress in its studies of the potentials of pumped-back storage projects at Federal reservoirs.
Representing another "new frontier" in the field of power production and marketing, the plan uses cheap off-peak energy to pump water to high elevations for later release to generate hydroelectricity at hours of peak consumption, thus permitting important savings in plant investment for generating capacity.
Through their prodigious purchases of sporting equipment, hunting and fishing licenses, and other recreational goods the American people have demonstrated an intense (and verifiable) desire to participate in outdoor recreation.
Through their expressions of preferences at the ballot box, through repeated and increasing appropriations for recreational development of Federal resources, and through many, and rapidly growing, recreational visits to federally managed resources, the American people have expressed an intense (and verifiable) desire to use such resources for outdoor recreation.
Outdoor recreation also has cultural values that are essential to the health of the Nation. It is a part of the educational process that strengthens men's minds as well as their bodies; that broadens their understanding of the laws of nature; that sharpens their appreciation of its manifold beauties; and that fortifies man's most precious possession—the spirit which gives life its meaning. These are the qualities which in the long run make a nation and its people truly great and which find strong nourishment in outdoor recreation."
In an atmosphere of growing awareness of these basic facts, substantial progress has been made since January 1961 in providing for America's present and future outdoor recreation needs.
President Kennedy told the 1962 White House Conference on Conservation: "I can think of no more suitable effort for an administration which is concerned with progress than to be identified with efforts to preserve this land and maintain its beauty."
Cape Cod in Massachusetts, Point Reyes in California, and Padre Island in Texas have been authorized as new National Seashore Areas as part of a comprehensive program to provide outdoor recreation areas adjacent to metropolitan centers.
Memorial in Arkansas: Russell Cave National Monument in Alabama: St, Thomas National Historic Site in the Virgin Islands; and Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace and Sagamore Hill National Historic Sites in New York.
Enactment of the Housing Act of 1961, a landmark in conservation effort, now enables urban areas to guide their growth and development through the acquisition of public lands in tracts up to 5,000 acres for recreation and other purposes.
To provide additional recreational resources, the Department has inaugurated an intensive program for expanded recreational use of public lands.
A major feature of the program is the sale to State and local governments of public lands expressly for outdoor recreation at the nominal fee of $2.50 per acre.
Under revised regulations affecting the construction of federally financed reservoirs, sufficient land can now be acquired to preserve the recreational potential of large water impoundments.
A Bureau of Outdoor Recreation has been established in the Department to coordinate Federal recreation programs; stimulate and provide assistance to the States in the development of recreation programs; sponsor and conduct research; encourage interstate and regional cooperative recreation projects; conduct recreation resource surveys; and formulate a national recreation plan on the basis of State, regional, and Federal plans.
The President, by Executive order, established a Cabinet-level Recreation Advisory Council—consisting of the Secretaries of the Interior, Agriculture, Defense, Health, Education, and Welfare, and the Administrator of the Housing and Home Finance Agency—to facilitate coordinated efforts among the various Federal agencies concerned with outdoor recreation.
Preliminary hearings have paved the way for congressional action on the President's request for establishment of a pay-asyou-go" land conservation fund to finance acquisition of lands for conservation and recreation purposes.
The fund would be supported by recreation taxes and user charges to apply originally against an advance appropriation of $500 million.
Congress authorized use for recreation of facilities at wildlife refuges and fish hatcheries provided it does not interfere with primary conservation objectives.
Under this legislation, the Department of the Interior will install recreational facilities, including picnic areas, swimming beaches, and boat docks, at some 200 federally operated hatcheries and refuges.
A special recreation inventory, scheduled for completion early in 1963, is being conducted by the Department's Bureau of Land Management to identify areas of the national land reserve suitable for public recreation.
During fiscal year 1962, a total of 19 research contracts, involving a commitment of $720,000, were let under the Area Redevelopment Act to accelerate the development of recreational attractions on Indian reservations.
New recreation facilities are being planned in Indian areas of Nevada, Oregon, South Dakota, Wvoming, Wisconsin, Colorado, and Alaska, and the tribal-owned Fort Apache Reservation's White Mountain enterprise in Arizona is expanding recreational development from seasonal to year-round use.
The Senate approved and the House gave preliminary consideration to legislation authorizing a study of the Nation's ocean, lake, and river shorelines to develop a Federal-State shoreline preservation program.
Important new legislation will permit the orderly movement of millions of acres of agricultural land not needed to produce food and fibers to recreational and other uses.
A Presidential recommendation that the Federal Surplus Property Disposal Act be amended to permit States and local governments to acquire surplus Federal lands for park and recreation uses on more liberal terms is awaiting congressional action.
Recognition of the interrelationship of the nations of the world in developing plans to meet recreation needs was given with convening in June 1962 of the First World Conference on National Parks in Seattle, Wash., attended by delegates from 63 nations.
It is our task in our time and in our generation," President Kennedy has said, "to hand down undiminished to those who come after us, what was handed down to us by those who went before, the natural wealth and beauty which is ours .. . an America of open spaces, of fresh water, of green country; a place where wildlife and natural beauty cannot be despoiled, where increasing urbanized population can still find the spiritual strength upon which our greatness as a country depends."
That we as a nation have neglected this task in recent decades is seen in the fact that from 1900 through 1920 we added 8½ million acres to the Federal system of parks and monuments administered by the Department's National Park Service; in the next 20 years the figure rose to well over 10 million; but from 1941 to January 1961 the total additional space set aside for the use and enjoyment of all the people amounted to just over 92,000 acres.
The unimpressive record of the past 20 years has corresponded with a period of unparalleled population growth—and with a rediscovery by millions of Americans of the value of the out-of-doors.
It is an almost incredible fact that 90 percent of our people now take part in some form of outdoor recreation.
This translates into 4½ billion individual recreation activities a year.
By far the greatest single recreational attraction is water, and last year well over 100 million citizens were estimated to have participated in some form of water recreation.
In 1961, some 16½ million Americans crowded our campgrounds—a gain of about 2 million in a single year.
Many additional millions hunted, fished, skied, or took part in some other form of outdoor recreation.
In his 1962 message to the Congress on conservation, the President pointed out that we may look forward to still heavier demands for recreation facilities in the years ahead.
In response to his 1961 natural resource message, the 1st session of the 87th Congress had authorized establishment of the great outer beach of Cape Cod as a National Seashore Area, the first major addition to the National Park System in 14 years.
In 1962, the Congress moved even more rapidly to meet recreational needs with approval of an 80½-mile-long national seashore park preserving the unspoiled natural beauty of Padre Island off the coast of Texas, and authorization of the establishment of a third new National Seashore Area at Point Reyes, an undeveloped area of great beauty just 30 miles from San Francisco.
These three actions alone added considerably more acreage to the National Park System than the total additions of the previous 20 vears.
Prior to 1961, only 336 miles of the Atlantic coast and 296 miles of the Pacific shorelines were available as public lands.
The three new seashore areas provide the American people with nearly half again that total—some 285 miles of unspoiled seacoast for public use.
Visitors to our network of national parks and monuments now total more than 85 million annually.
The world-famous 10,023-foot Haleakala Volcano in Hawaii became the center of a new National Park—the 30th in the Federal system and the first to be established since 1956.
Hawaii's new City of Refuge National Historic Site preserves the "sacred" ground where vanquished Hawaiian warriors of old could find a guarantee of sanctuary.
In the Virgin Islands, the new Buck Island Reef National Memorial protects one of the finest marine gardens in the Caribbean Sea.
The first pioneer settlement of the lower Mississippi Valley is commemorated by the new Arkansas Post National Memorial.
An archeological record of human habitation from 6000 B.C. to about A.D. 1650 is contained in Alabama's new Russell Cave National Monument.
The new St. Thomas National Historic Site contains Fort Christian, completed in 1680—the oldest existing structure in the Virgin Islands.
New York City's new Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site preserves the home where Roosevelt spent part of his childhood, and Sagamore Hill National Historic Site protects the Long Island mansion which was the 26th President's home from 1887 until his death in 1919.
Both were gifts this year to the Government and the people from private philanthropic individuals and organizations.
At the same time, the groundwork was laid for Congressional action on the establishment of additional park areas recommended by President Kennedy in his 1962 conservation message.
While Reclamation projects are constructed to provide such primary benefits as irrigation, hydroelectric power, municipal and industrial water, and stream control, hey also provide recreational benefits which are becoming increasingly important with the rapid increase in population.
For example, a significant portion of the growing demand for outdoor recreational opportunities in the Pacific Northwest is being met by facilities of Bureau of Reclamation projects.
Almost 4 million visitor days were recorded at some 65 different recreational areas during 1961—a 30-percent increase over 1958.
During the first half of 1962, 91,700 visitors took advantage of the self-guided tour at Grand Coulee Dam.
The comparable figure for 1961 was 40,000.
Another major attraction for tourists has been the construction of Glen Canyon Dam on the Colorado River in Arizona.
A temporary tourist center was completed in June 1961.
Farther down the river, in June 1962, nearly 70,000 visitors toured Hoover Dam.
In total, visitors to the some 190 manmade reservoir lakes of the Bureau of Reclamation in all areas of the West now approximate 26 million annually—indicating America's appreciation of this major new recreational resource.
This represents an increase of one-third over 1958, and a quadrupling of use since 1950.
Referring to the immensity of the effort which will be necessary to provide adequately for the Nation's foreseeable requirements for recreational space and facilities, President Kennedy, in his 1961 special message to the Congress on natural resources, said: "It is not a task which should or can be done by the Federal Government alone. Only through the fullest participation and cooperation of State and local governments and private industry can it be done wisely and effectively."
Working in close coordination with the President's new Recreation Advisory Council, the Department's Bureau of Outdoor Recreation has made significant progress toward achievement of this aim.
In the 6 months or so since its establishment, the Bureau has held exploratory meetings with many State officials looking toward establishment of Federal grants-in-aid and technical service assistance programs.
In the past decade, while the U.S. population increased by almost 20 percent, total hunting and fishing licenses sold almost doubled the rate of population increase.
At the same time, rapid advances in engineering techniques have made possible a vastly accelerated exploitation of natural resources— with corresponding reductions in favorable wildlife environment.
Wildlife, therefore, is caught in a squeeze from two directions: diminishing habitat and increased demand.
The growing intensity of the demand for this form of outdoor recreation may be seen in the fact that, in 1960, nearly 25.5 million anglers spent $2.7 billion and drove 18.8 billion miles.
During the same year, 14.6 million hunters spent more than $1.6 billion and drove 7.6 billion miles in pursuit of that sport.
It is estimated that one man in every four goes fishing today, one in every five goes hunting and the percentage is still rising.
One problem in attempting to meet the tremendous demand for hunting and fishing opportunities may be seen when these facts are considered: Wetlands are, acre for acre, considered to be the most productive wildlife habitat.
The most recent wetlands inventory of the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service, published in 1961, listed 38 game and fur-bearing species—in addition to great flights of waterfowl—making use of one or more of the 20 types of wetlands in the various States.
It is estimated that there were 127 million acres of these marshes and swamps when white men first appeared on this continent.
Through drainage, flood control, and other measures this area has been reduced to about 74.5 million acres, of which only 22.5 million is considered good wildlife habitat.
Ducks in flight over feeding station at North Dakota refuge.
The 87th Congress—in one of its major conservation actions—authorized the Department to "borrow" funds against future duck stamp revenue to accelerate wetlands purchase.
To meet this two-pronged problem, the Congress—in one of its major conservation actions of 1961—approved a departmental proposal that it be allowed to "borrow" funds against future duck stamp revenue to speed up wetlands purchase.
That extraordinary action was sorely needed is shown in the fact that, before 1961, land acquired for Federal wildlife refuges cost an average of $12.40 an acre; in fiscal year 1961, this average price increased to $69.39 an acre; while in the 1962 fiscal year the average price was $86.71 per acre.
With an authorized 7-year advance of $105 million to acquire land ahead of rising prices, the Department of the Interior, under the new legislation, has been enabled to move forward with a greatly accelerated program for the preservation of wildlife as a major recreational resource.The Department's 7-year program contemplates the acquisition of 2,950,000 acres of land.
Of this total, about 1.2 millior acres will be for new migratory waterfowl refuges or additions to existing refuges.
The remaining 1,750,000 acres will be for waterfowl production areas in the prairie States.
In fiscal year 1962, funds were obligated for the acquisition of 18,915 acres for refuges and 16,649 acres for wildlife production areas in 16 States.
At the same time, additional funds were obligated for 16,650 acres of small wetlands for waterfowl production in North and South Dakota and Minnesota.
The especially acute problem confronting these three prairie States was pointed up in the report of the Senate Select Committee on National Water Resources.
The rapid decrease in wetlands, the report said, '"is particularly acute in a 56,000-square-mile area of the northern prairies in Minnesota, North Dakota, and South Dakota. In that section there exists the most valuable area for waterfowl production in the coterminous United States. Since 1943, an estimated 1,027,000 acres of this area has been destroyed by the expenditure by the Federal Government of an estimated $25 million for farm drainage."
It was with particular reference to this problem that President Kennedy told the Congress in his 1962 conservation message: "I am hopeful that consistent and coordinated Federal leadership can expand our fish and wildlife opportunites without the present conflicts of agencies and interests: One Department paying to have wetlands drained for agricultural purposes while another is purchasing such lands for wildlife or waterfowl refuges."
Taking cognizance of the urgency of the problem, the 87th Congress undertook positive corrective action with passage of legislation providing that the Secretary of Agriculture may not grant technical or financial assistance for drainage projects in Minnesota or the Dakotas which are found by the Secretary of the Interior to be harmful to waterfowl.
This important legislation had the endorsement of both Departments.
Even prior to its passage the two agencies had reached administrative agreement on a joint drainage-project policy which has permitted substantial progress in protection of threatened waterfowl production areas in the Prairie States as well as in other regions.
Meanwhile, through agreement reached between the Department of the Interior and the Army early this vear on the protection of lands around Federal reservoirs, fish and wildlife and outdoor recreation programs have been considerably accelerated.
Under the previous policy, adopted in October 1953, the Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers obtained land title only to a relatively narrow strip around reservoirs.
The new policy provides for the acquisition of sufficient land to meet both present and future requirements for recreation and fish and wildlife development and management.
In April 1961, the Department announced inauguration of a new type of public land management program with formal designation of a 92-square-mile Federal-State cooperative land and wildlife management area in south-central California.
Created by this pioneering agreement was the Caliente National Cooperative Land and Wildlife Management Area consisting of 58,868 acres of public lands to be administered by the Bureau of Land Management in cooperation with the Fish and Wildlife Service and the State of California.
Through a cooperative program, the Department and the State agreed to jointly develop the wildlife, recreational, and other natural resources of the area, noted for its quail and partridge hunting.
In little more than a year, 10 additional cooperative areas had been established, assuring the development of the recreational and fish and wildlife potentials of hundreds of thousands of acres to meet the needs of California's expanding population.
Congress has authorized the development of outdoor recreational resources for public use at wildlife refuges, so long as basic objectives of wildlife management are not bindered.
The important contribution made by our National Wildlife Refuges in providing outdoor recreation opportunities is shown by the 11 million visitors to those areas in 1961—a figure more than tripled in 10 years.
A long existing difficulty in this regard has been the fact that the refuges are not equipped with either facilities or personnel to accommodate this large and rapidly increasing influx of visitors.
The 87th Congress took action to remedy this situation through passage of legislation formally authorizing use for recreation of facilities at wildlife refuges and fish hatcheries provided it does not interfere with primary conservation objectives.
With this authorization, the Department of the Interior is enabled to proceed with the installation of recreational facilities, including picnic areas, swimming beaches, and boat docks, at about 200 federally operated hatcheries and refuges.
Expansion of the Department's fish and wildlife program is marked by establishment of marine laboratories such as this one at Tiburon, Calif.
In all, a total of well over 100,000 acres is scheduled to be added to the Nation's wildlife and waterfowl sanctuaries under these actions.
The Department has approved an order setting aside public lands in Utah for a new national fish hatchery which promises important benefits to that State's economy and recreational fishing.
A new marine laboratory has been established at Sandy Hook, N.J., to study management of salt-water sport fish—the basis of a growing industry.
A national reservoir fishery research program has been launched with establishment of two new research centers in South Dakota and Arkansas.
Preliminary hearings paved the way for Congressional action on legislation to safeguard for waterfowl use the vital Klamath-Tule Lake wildlife area near the California-Oregon line.
The legislation—which would solve a problem that has been under discussion for over 20 years—is designed to permit present agricultural use while simultaneously protecting waterfowl rights in three refuges.
Valuable new progress has been made in studies of diseases and pesticidesby the new Federal Pest Control Review Board, established in 1961 because of concern over losses of fish and wildlife and possible hazards to public health because of increasing aerial spraying of poisonous pesticides.
An advisory board composed of distinguished wildlife experts and conservationists has been appointed to assist in formulating wildlife management programs and policies on lands administered by the Department of the Interior.
Recognition of the growing need for knowledge, particularly among young students, of our fishery resources, was provided by Congress in authorizing establishment in Washington, D.C., of a $10 million National Fisheries Center and Aquarium.
In addition to educational benefits for many thousand of visitors to the Capital, the new center will make significant contributions to numerous scientifie studies including medical and biological research.
One hundred years ago the Congress passed the Homestead Act— providing a significant stimulus to our national development.
In the century that has followed, more than 1.1 billion acres of the original public domain have been transferred to private and non-Federal public ownership.
Today, the 768 million acres remaining in Federal ownership represent one of our most important assets, with the millions of acres set aside for national parks, forests, and wildlife refuges contributing increasingly to the national welfare.
Yet, exclusive of Alaska, 180 million acres of public-domain land awaits the realization of its full potential.
It was in cognizance of this fact that President Kennedy in his February 1961 conservation message to the Congress described unused public land as "a vital national reserve that should be devoted to productive use now and maintained for future generations."
Much of the public domain," he wrote, "suffers from uncontrolled use and a lack of proper management. More than 100 million acres of our Federal Grazing Districts are producing livestock forage well below their potential. We can no longer afford to sit by while our public domain assets so deteriorate."
In response, the Department of the Interior immediately took action on a broader scale than any undertaken in many years to assure better usage of, and more adequate returns from the resources of the public land.
Within weeks, an 18-month moratorium was ordered on most types of nonmineral applications for land of the public domain of which there then existed an overwhelming backlog—representing the accumulation of three to four years.
First: Reduce the backlog of applications to manageable proportions.
Third: Review and revise Departmental regulations and initiate legislative proposals necessary to modernize the Nation's land laws.
With termination of the moratorium in September 1962, the backlog of applications had been reduced from 40,000 to 17,000.
Only through knowledge of the characteristics and capabilities of the public lands can their best usage in the public interest be achieved.
More orderly handling of land office business has permitted the Department to undertake the first fully comprehensive inventory and evaluation of the national land reserve in history.
With completion of the initial phase of this large-scale project scheduled for mid-1963, the work thus far accomplished has pointed the way to important conservation gains.
An example of benefits to be realized through comprehensive and up-to-date inventories may be found in the forest resources on public lands.
Under this Administration, the Department has considerably expanded its cooperative efforts with the Department of Agriculture to improve on timber sale practices and achieve a further standardization of forest inventory procedures.
As a result, increases of some 175 million board feet in the annual allowable harvest of western Oregon timber lands administered by the Department of the Interior have been made possible.
As a further significant result of the 18-month moratorium order, the Department has submitted to Congress a comprehensive program for modernization of public land laws, establishing new authority to manage and develop the public lands natural resources.
Here emphasis has been placed on legislation which will authorize public lands not needed for public purposes to be leased or sold and to be transferred to private ownership as residential and business sites or to meet the needs of a modern industrial and urbanized society.
The public lands of the West can provide growing space for rapidly expanding urban and industrial land requirements.
The Department is seeking legislation to permit orderly transfer for these purposes.
The 5-year program—with projections to 1980—recommends major expansions of conservation projects on the public land reserve and accelerated efforts to provide recreational facilities, halt soil erosion, and protect forest resources.
Reseeding and brush control programs on public ranges will be stepped up and fences and water-control projects will be increased.
Timber stand improvement activities, such as reseeding, thinning, and pruning, wili be accelerated.
One of the major elements of the plan is the development of 1,450 recreation sites on public lands.
Related to this and other elements of the program is the proposed building of more than 3,000 miles of access roads before 1967.
The cost of the first 5-year phase of this comprehensive program is estimated at about $478 million.
During the same period, public land revenues will total about four times as much—almost $1.9 billion.
The Department of the Interior administers some of the most valuable Douglas-fir forests in the world.
To assure their highest use and productivity, the Department has undertaken the development of an intensive new forest management program for forest lands under its jurisdiction.
Features of the program include harvesting of immature timber which would ordinarily be lost to growth competition, and an accelerated reforestation project to bring denuded commercial forest lands into full production by 1970 and assure their sustained production.
Administration, has arranged for loans to small firms for construction of access roads to timber sale areas.
By using these loans, smaller firms are able to compete on larger sales where considerable amounts of capital outlay are needed to develop access road systems.
Other pending changes in timber sale regulations designed to aid forestry include longer contract periods, reduction of performance bonds, cutting timber in advance of payment, and the allowance of installment payments on sales valued as low as $500.
For the first time the need to reverse the trend of deterioration and to build toward full sustained-yield production of the 194 million acres of range resources administered by the Department has been placed in perspective as a major national problem.
An evaluation of the needs of the western rangelands has shown that more than 100 million acres require an immediate and intensive stepping up of conservation programs if the process of rehabilitation is to be begun.
To cope with this large-scale problem, the Department, since January 1961, has accelerated its program to improve range management, with particular emphasis on range use supervision, trespass control, and range studies.
In both 1961 and 1962, the Congress approved supplemental appropriations—the first ever granted—for work toward rehabilitation of vast burned-over range areas, and in fiscal year 1963 funds for this purpose have been made a regular part of the soil and moisture conservation budget.
Over 500,000 acres of rangelands have received conservation treatment in the form of such projects as brush control, seeding, water control structures, stockwater developments, and fences.
A comprehensive weed control program has proceeded as rapidly as money and manpower will allow under cooperative Departmental research projects conducted by the Agricultural Research Service of the Department of Agriculture and by State universities in several of the States as well as direct control measures on the ground.
As a forerunner to a full-scale appraisal of the public rangelands, the Departments of Agriculture and of the Interior conducted a trial appraisal program on lands administered by the two agencies in Colorado, Montana, and Oregon.
Undertaken at the request of the Senate Appropriations Committee, the study included such factors as suitability for livestock grazing, past and present management, range condition and trend, current and potential grazing capacity, range use by livestock and wildlife, and existing and needed conservation practices and improvements.
Department's accelerated range management program bas provided more than 500,000 acres of rangelands like these with conservation treatment in the form of such projects as brush control, seeding, water control structures, stockwater developments, and fences.
In the past 30 years, this Nation has consumed more minerals than all the peoples of the world had previously used.
Twice during those three decades we have doubled the money value of mineral production.
That current demands are being met without difficulty is primarily due to the immense technical and exploratory efforts of the 1940's and early 1950's.
But with national requirements constantly increasing, the present availability of raw materials will not continue unless prompt action is taken to look to the years ahead.
Since January 1961, this Administration has given strong support to legislative proposals designed to assure that the multiplied needs of the future will be met.
A clear example of these needs may be seen in the growing national requirements for, and shrinking supplies of, helium.
Protection of our irreplaceable helium resources has become increasingly important with growing use of this element in space age and nuclear technology.
Helium's unique properties of lightness, inertness, low-liquefaction temperature, and transparency to radioactive particles have caused a phenomenal upswing in demand during the past 10 years.
Helium occurs as a minor constituent of some natural gases and is extracted by a low-temperature gas liquefication process.
Unless helium is extracted from the natural gas, it is wasted when the gas is burned.
In the last two decades no new sources of helium have been found comparable with those previously known.
Because of this, the Bureau of Mines is extracting as much helium as is feasible and storing it underground in a depleted natural gas field.
Without this program, about 5 billion cubic feet of helium would be wasted annually in natural gas used for fuel.
The 1st session of the 87th Congress authorized expansion of the Department's helium conservation program and, in little more than a year following this action, contracts totaling $47.5 million annually for up to 22 years were awarded under which private industry has agreed to build and operate five plants to extract and thus prevent waste of helium in marketed natural gas.
The first of these plants was placed in operation, delivering its output to a 430-mile, $8.5 million pipeline system just built by the Bureau of Mines.
The new pipeline will connect all of thə five new plants with four of the Bureau's production-and-purification plants and with the Cliffside gasfield near Amarillo, Tex., for underground storage.
The remaining four new plants are scheduled for completion by early 1963, and the five new installations combined will deliver more than 3 billion cubic feet of helium annually to the pipeline-storage system.
Additionally, the Bureau of Mines has made considerable progress in research on minerals processing and utilization, including preparation of steel from pyrophoric iron powders and preparation of extraordinary pure nickel and rhenium metals by solvent extraction electrolytic combination processes.
While there are no easy answers to the many complex problems in the field of energy, major moves have been taken in recent months with the intent of expanding the use of the Nation's great coal reserves.
Since January 1961, more emphasis has been placed on efforts to improve the position of the Nation's coal industry than at any other time in recent years.
One of the most significant steps in this direction was taken with establishment in the Department of a new Office of Coal Research, designed to complement the continuing research programs of the Bureau of Mines with the particular aim of achieving breakthroughs where possible on a short-range basis.
The interest stimulated by this action is shown in the fact that, since its establishment, the Office has received more than 250 research proposals from private companies, individuals, research organizations, and educational institutions.
In fiscal year 1962, contracts with a total value of nearly $3 million were granted for research in the fields of coal production, utilization, processing, equipment, and transportation.
At the same time, continuing progress has been reported by the Bureau of Mines in major coal research projects, including hydraulic mining, conversion of coal to high B.t.u. gas, development of a practical coal-burning turbine engine, and conversion of coal to liquid and gaseous fuels.
One of the major disadvantages of the coal industry in attempting to compete in the energy markets with other fuels has long been the problem of transportation.
A possible breakthrough in this regard may be found in the relatively recent development of a coal slurry—a mixture of coal and water which can be fed directly into boilers for producing steam to generate electricity.
This slurry is capable of being transported through pipelines similar to those used for oil, and proposed new legislation would facilitate the construction of interstate pipelines—through Federal use of the right of eminent domain and by other means—to transport slurry from minemouth to large energy users.
Interior Department technicians conducted a study for the President's Panel on Civilian Technology which demonstrated that the pipelining of coal could have a healthy effect on the coal industry.
Among benefits could be substantial improvement of economic conditions not only in the coal industry but in many coal mining communities that presently are in a seriously depressed condition.
The first Federal mineral leasing on the Pacific coast Outer Continental Shelf marked a conservation landmark when some 80,000 acres of submerged lands off the coast of southern California were offered for competitive phosphate leasing.
Also, large blocks of Outer Continental Shelf lands off the gulf coast including nearly 2 million acres off Louisiana and Texas—were leased for oil and gas exploration with bonus bids totalling more than $445 million—the largest amount ever received in a single Federal lease opening.
In another pioneering step contributing both to conservation and the national security, the Department completed preparations for the opening of bids in January 1963 covering the first lease-sale of Federal oil and gas lands off the coast of California.
Development of the oil resources covered by this sale will provide a significant stimulus to the economy of northern California while adding to vital national emargency reserves.
Fiscal year 1962 applications for minerals exploration assistance increased 175 percent over 1961 following the revision and streamlining of Office of Minerals Exploration regulations, including the addition of gold, silver, and iron ore to the eligibility list.
The Department's Geological Survey discovered new deposits of beryllium ore in the Lost River area of Alaska, about 70 miles northwest of Nome.
Beryllium, a scarce metal worth approximately $70 a pound, is valuable as a strengthening and hardening material when alloyed with copper and nickel and also has considerable potential for use in supersonic planes, space craft, missiles, and nuclear reactors.
Titanium metal, produced with techniques pioneered by the Department's Bureau of Mines, was used in the framework and "skin" of the Mercury capsule's cabin, helping to shield astronauts from the high temperatures encountered in the frontiers of outer space.
Oil and gas exploration, development, and production in Alaska has experienced a sharp increase, particularly on the Kenai Peninsula, in a development expected to stimulate the economic growth of that State and provide additional incentive for further mineral exploration.
The Bureau of Land Management has begun an inventory of the known mineral resources and potential minerals areas under the Department's administration to provide a basis for a more effective management program.
The Geological Survey inaugurated a long-range geologic mapping program to provide information for the classification of Federal lands valuable for such leasable minerals as coal, oil shale, oil and gas, phosphate, potash, and sodium, with the objective of making some 50 million acres of withdrawn Federal lands subject to public land laws.
Reopening of the Government's experimental oil shale plant at Rifle, Colo., an important link in efforts to find new uses of oil shale through concentrated research, was authorized by the 2d session of the 87th Congress.
Action was taken to strengthen the oil import control program.
Provision was made for"new comers" to obtain allocations of residual fuel oil based upon terminal throughputs, whereas previously the program was limited to historical importers.
The crude oil import program was made more responsive to the needs of the oil industry by reducing the number of steps in the sliding scale for allocation holders on "refinery inputs" basis from eight to four.
In the past 2 years this Administration has moved forward rapidly in a new program for the Indians which places emphasis on preparing the Indian population for full, equal participation in all aspects of our national life.
President Kennedy outlined his views on Indian policy soon after his election when he said: "We want every group which is now unable to make its full contribution to American strength to be given the opportunity to do so. It is in this spirit that we shall approach our work on Indian reservations, and it is in this spirit, I am sure, that Indians throughout the country will work together for a better life for themselves and thus a stronger America."
In February 1961, a special task force was appointed by the Department to make a thorough study of the problems and programs affecting the lives of the 380,000 Indians still receiving services from the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and to put forward recommendations looking toward "a better life" for these Americans.
In July of that year, the task force—after traveling 15,000 miles and conferring with the representatives of 200 organized tribes— completed its report.
The comprehensive document recommended programs and actions designed to blaze a new trail in Indian development.
The task force believes that in the foreseeable future, the proper role of the Federal Government is to help Indians find their way along a new trail—one which leads to equal citizenship, maximum self-sufficiency, and full participation in American life. In discharging this role, it must seek to make available to Indians a greater range of alternatives which are compatible with the American system, and, where necessary, to assist Indians with choosing from among these alternatives. As a part of this responsibility, it must mobilize and direct the vast reservoir of good will toward Indians which is found throughout the country."
Prompt action to implement the task force recommendations came not only from the Department but from the Congress.
Under the Area Redevelopment Act, 56 reservations and four areas in Alaska—containing about two-thirds of the total Indian population—have been made eligible for special aid to assist in overall economic development.
Some 50 Indian tribes have applied for ARA grants for studies of economic development possibilities, and in fiscal year 1962 a total of 19 research contracts were let, involving a commitment of $720,000, with particular emphasis on the development of new recreational and tourist attractions.
Included in the ARA studies now underway is a project to determine improved methods for expanding the Alaskan native arts and crafts market.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs' adult vocational training program has been accelerated and expanded as the result of action by Congress increasing the authorized amount of appropriations for the program from $3.5 to $7.5 million annually.
Similarly, an increase from $10 to $20 million in authorized appropriations has made possible substantial expansion of the Bureau's revolving credit program for Indians.
The program of school construction on reservations has been considerably accelerated, with the provision of facilities for all Indian children needing educational opportunities now scheduled for the end of fiscal year 1965.
Indian educational opportunities are being expanded.
This class at Eagle Butte, S. Dak., is in a school jointly operated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the local public school district.
A new milestone in Indian education was reached with the opening in Santa Fe, N. Mex., of the Institute of American Indian Arts.
Current enrollment of about 150 students in the 3- year high school and 2-year postgraduate course includes Indian voung people from all parts of the United States.
An additional 180 students are continuing with regular academic studies at the school in 1962-63.
The institute offers a regular high school curriculum plus special training in applied and creative arts.
Since the summer of 1961, the Bureau of Indian Affairs has been making greater use of work forces which it recruits and supervises directly for construction work on schools, roads, irrigation projects, and other facilities.
Previously, all such work was done by private contractors who recruited and supervised their own work forces.
Indian woman working on rug is symbolic of departmental efforts to develop and protect Indian art as unique cultural craft.
The Department and the Federal Housing Administration have entered into an agreement designed to increase the availability of FHA-insured financing for home construction and housing improvements on reservations.
In addition, approval was given by the Public Housing Administration for a low-rent public housing project on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota—the first such project on Indian lands—and similar projects on other reservations are in the planning stage.
The territories under U.S. administration have made substantial progress since January 1961 under the Kennedy Administration policy of promoting self-government and encouraging expanded social and economic development.
Congressional support of the President's endorsement of programs "commensurate with the responsibilities of our stewardship" was reflected in legislation raising the appropriations ceiling for the widely scattered islands of the Pacific Trust Territory from $7.5 to $15 million in 1963, and $17.5 million thereafter.
Improvement of agricultural development is one of Department's principal aims in territories under its jurisdiction.
This is an example of nut clusters on a choice mother palm tree in Yap District, Trust Territory of the Pacific.
The Yap Islands are a particularly good source of seednuts.
Trees are selected and marked as sources of nuts for planting throughout the Territory.
An important step toward the development of competent selfgovernment also was taken with establishment of a new capital of the Trust Territory—including the Marianas, the Marshalls, and the Carolines—on the island of Saipan.
Following negotiations between the Departments of Interior and Defense, security restrictions which have hampered tourism and economic growth have been lifted for Guam and considerably lightened for the Trust Territory.
Through Presidential action, Navy security clearances no longer will be required as a condition of entering the territory of Guam, thus providing the same freedom of movement that exists in other parts of the United States.
Additionally, the President directed the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Interior to develop revised procedures which will facilitate free entry of U.S. citizens, U.S. investment, and U.S.-flag vessels into the Trust Territory.
A new $4.5 million jet airstrip on Samoa—designed to open the way for tourist development—has been placed in operation.
Jet service to Samoa reduces by half the previous 8-hour travel span from Hawaii.
Three new high schools have been completed on Samoa and preliminary work is underway on 5 new junior high schools and 20 new elementary schools in an accelerated educational program made possible by a Federal appropriation of $9.6 million for the island in fiscal year 1962, more than 4 times the amount previously available.
Eleven miles of modern roads, first on the islands, have been completed, new electrical generating equipment has been installed, and additional road, hospital, and sanitation facilities are on the drafting boards.
The new College of Guam, providing higher education for Guamanians as well as students from the trust territory, is now in operation, and progress is being made toward elimination of a dual wage situation whereby Guamanians have received less than U.S. employes doing similar work.
Hunger is the greatest human problem facing the world today.
More than half of the world's population—some 2 billion people— suffer from a lack of food supplies which are adequate in quality and juantity to sustain desired levels of health, growth, and vigor.
And he problem will be vastly intensified by the year 2000 when the present world population shall have more than doubled.
Widespread malnutrition, and undernutrition, is largely due to inadequacies of high quality protein in the human diet.
The only readily available source of inexpensive animal protein in sufficient quantities to remedy this diet deficiency is in the sea in the form of fish.
Fish can supply these diet deficiencies in the form of concentrated protein.
Wisely utilized and managed, the sea with its vast fish populations represents an almost unlimited reservoir of high quality animal protein.
The sea around us represents one of our most important but least understood and almost wholly undeveloped areas for extending our resource base .
Salt (and fresh water) fisheries are among our most important but far from fully developed reservoirs of protein foods.
Departmental oceanographic research programs help to assure catches like this for Nation's fisheries industry.
But all this will require increased efforts, under Federal leadership, for rehabilitation of depleted stocks of salmon and sardines in the Pacific, groundfish and oysters in the Atlantic, lake trout and other desirable species in the Great Lakes, and many others through biological research, development of methods for passing fish over dams, and control of pollution.
This Administration intends to give concerted attention to our whole national effort in the basic and applied research of oceanography. Construction of ship and shore facilities for ocean research and survey, the development of new instruments for charting the seas and gathering data, and the training of new seientifie manpower will require the coordinated efforts of many Federal agencies."
In implementation of the President's suggestions, Government and many private agencies engaged in the marine sciences have embarked on a long-range program of oceanographic research.
This large and important undertaking is being coordinated by a special Interagency Committee on Oceanography.
The work of this Committee is designed to meet the divergent needs of commerce, defense, atomic energy development, and production of mineral and fishery resources.
Four Bureaus of the Department of the Interior are taking a significant part in this new program: the Bureau of Mines, Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, Commercial Fisheries, and the Geological Survey.
The Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, being responsible for support of the fishing industry and for development of sea food resources, has a large share of the Department's marine sciences program.
In this work, it operates in close collaboration with the Navy Department, the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Science Foundation, and other agencies in Government and the various State and private research institutions.
Apart from the purely humanitarian issues, there are other compelling aspects to what represents the greatest and most interesting challenge in this substantial new program—that of helping to find answers to the world's hunger problems.
For example, the massscale production of a satisfactory fish protein concentrate would provide a tremendous economic stimulation for our domestic fishing industry.
Production of fish protein concentrate would help to diversify the markets of our industrial fisheries.
It would assist in restoring the ecological balance of the oceans by utilizing the many species of fish now ignored or wasted by commercial fishermen.
It would provide a market for the great quantities of fish inadvertently taken along with the more valuable varieties and are now discarded at sea because no markets exist for them.
In many areas, glut periods lower the price of even the valuable catch and frequently, even for these desirable species, no market is available.
If, however, the processor were able to manufacture fish protein concentrate during these periods of surplus, markets would tend to stabilize, and hungry people in all parts of the world would benefit.
Today, as the result of concentrated research, a final breakthrough in the development of a fish protein concentrate satisfactory to the requirements and needs for quantity production and distribution appears close at hand.
Closely allied with the problem of meeting world food needs, and with finding new markets and uses for our fishery products, is the problem of finding ways and means of catching fish more efficiently, of knowing where they are, and determining the factors which have a bearing on their abundance.
With increased appropriations provided by the Congress, considerable progress is being made in obtaining the ships and shore facilities needed for modern fishery oceanographic research on the scale now being undertaken.
Funds were budgeted to the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries to build a new laboratory at La Jolla, Calif., and to make improvements to existing laboratories at Auke Bay, Alaska, Oxford, Md., and Boothbay Harbor, Maine.
In addition, a new sea-water system and building for experimental studies on fish and shellfish has been completed at the Galveston, Tex., laboratory.
A new 180-foot biological and oceanographic vessel has been launched at Slidell, La., for operation in Atlantic waters, and plans are being developed for new research vessels for use in the Central Pacific, in the North Atlantic, and in the Gulf of Mexico.
Additionally, funds are budgeted in fiscal year 1963 for a new oceanographic sh'p for operation in Eastern Pacific waters and for a $2 million laboratory at Seattle, Wash.
To increase the supply of trained oceanographers and fishery biologists and technologists needed to undertake this research, the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries has set up a program of grants for training of graduate students in universities throughout the country.
This will provide financial support to about 17 graduate-level students during the 1962–63 academic year, and it is expected that this number will be increased in succeeding years.
While emphasis has been given in the early phases of the oceanographic program to improvement of facilities and increasing scientific manpower, important new starts in research also have been made.
Initiated this year were expanded studies of gulf estuarine waters.
These waters are potentially as productive as much of our farmland, but we have not yet developed methods of culture that will permit maximum use of their potential.
Biologists have learned that these areas serve as nursery grounds for larvae of many varieties of commercial species of shrimp and fish which are taken as adults in the offshore waters of the Gulf.
They also provide a large portion of the Nation's oyster supply.
Fishery scientists have advocated studies of estuarine waters for the past several years because they have been concerned about the loss of this environment through the dredging of channels for real estate and other commercial developments.
The goal of this new research is to determine if these engineering developments are harming resource production and, if so, to find ways to prevent it.
A new program of oceanographic research in the tropical Atlantic Ocean is being organized this year.
The objective of this activity is to investigate the fishery potential in this important region.
The first fieldwork will be on the eastern side of the Atlantic to define the environment in which important high-seas tuna populations and other valuable fishery resources are known to exist.
Information necessary for successful renegotiation of the International North Pacific Fisheries Convention is the objective of an emergency salmon research program in Alaska.
The convention— between Japan, Canada, and the United States—became effective in 1953, and may be terminated, amended or continued in 1963.
The research program, undertaken by Bureau of Commercial Fisheries laboratories and with contract work being done by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game and the Fisheries Research Institute of the University of Washington, is nearing completion.
It has increased our knowledge of optimum spawning escapements, carrying capacity of lakes, and spawning characteristics necessary to support the Bristol Bay red salmon runs.
High seas salmon research reached maturity with emphasis on high seas tagging and sampling.
This has provided new information on locations and ocean migration habits of different stocks of salmon.
The proposed development of the Middle Snake River, an important tributary of the Columbia River, resulted in a new program oriented to the problem of fish passage, posed by construetion of high dams.
The State fisheries agencies of California, Idaho, Oregon and Washington are cooperating with the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries in developing techniques and equipment, and in research.
One of the most encouraging developments to the commercial fishing industry has come in the Great Lakes where a large-scale sea lamprey invasion had for some years all but put an end to the highly profitable lake trout catch.
Today, a two-pronged attack on the predators gives promise that full-scale lake trout fishing may be restored.
Under the auspices of the International Great Lakes Fishery Commission, the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries and the Fisheries Research Board of Canada treated with a selective toxicant all tributary streams of Lakes Superior and Michigan known to contain larval sea lampreys.
This major experiment in chemical control of an undesirable species shows every promise of ultimate success.
At the same time, artificial propagation has been used to restock Lake Superior with lake trout.
Survival of hatchery-planted trout is excellent and growth rapid, indicating a promising future for rehabilitating the lake trout fishery.
Since January 1961, this Government has been seeking, more earnestly than ever, to promote the conservation of natural resources in foreign countries.
The two basic reasons for this renewed emphasis are quite obvious: First, these activities further the objectives of the U.S. foreign aid program through helping millions of free people find their way to a better life; and, second, they also help assure adequate future supplies of raw materials which the United States must seek abroad.
The views of the Kennedy Administration in this regard were expressed by President Kennedy when he said: "Just as our investment of scientific talent, money, and time is better utilized in well coordinated and complementary programs within the Federal Government and by the closest working relationships with State and local governments, the academic community and industry, so our efforts should be meshed with those of the other countries of the world.
Resource conservation problems are world-wide; efforts to solve them should be equally universal.
This Nation will continue to cooperate in international scientific and research undertakings; and the useful information and specific technological applications we develop—economically feasible desalinization of sea water, for example—will be made available immediately, as has always bee our practice, to advance the welfare of all peoples of the world.
The expanding scope of our efforts in this field are particularly evident in international collaboration in minerals programs.
Despite the richness of its domestic resources this Nation is notably deficient in certain minerals.
Working in cooperation with the Agency for International Development, engineers of the Bureau of Mines are making substantial progress in helping to advance the development of mineral resources abroad.
Throughout our industrial history, we have depended on foreign sources for our tin supplies.
One of the major world producers of this metal in Indonesia, where recent serious declines in mining efficiency have threatened the industry's ability to continue as a leading producer.
Bureau of Mines engineers on technical assistance assignments in Indonesia have repeatedly advocated detailed study of the industry to determine the best solutions to its difficulties.
Their efforts now have borne fruit.
An American consulting team has been assigned to undertake a comprehensive study of all facts of Indonesian tin mining and this investigation is presently well underway.
To provide the energy production that is essential for advancing the economic status of underdeveloped countries, Bureau of Mines technicians have helped improve the utilization of native coal resources in several countries.
In Afghanistan, for example, the Bureau's efforts have resulted in a new mine, using modern methods, which is now coming into production.
Fuel shortages no longer will plague the country during severe winter months, and sizable quantities of coal will be available for the creation of small local industries in that landlocked nation.
Similar achievements are being realized in Indonesia and Taiwan.
Bureau engineers have been successful in creating new industries in other free-world countries.
In Mexico, a long dormant copper deposit has been brought to the verge of commercial operation through metallurgical research conducted by Government laboratories under the guidance of a Bureau metallurgist.
In Korea, Bureau efforts to develop iron-ore resources have helped expand production, which now is supplying growing local needs and also providing a surplus for export.
Our cooperation with nations abroad in resource conservation and development projects is by no means limited to the field of minerals.
A four-man Bureau of Reclamation team of engineers and agricultural experts will assist in evaluating proposals for water development in the Piranhas River Basin in northeastern Brazil, an area of extreme and persistent drought.
In response to a request from the Inter-American Development Bank, the Bureau of Reclamation is providing the services of an engineer to advise on problems connected with the important Villamontes irrigation project in Bolivia.
Seven engineers of the Geological Survey are conducting field surveys in Antarctica for topographic mapping in connection with the 1962–63 U.S. Antarctic research program.
In total, more than 150 Department technicians are presently assigned to 30 nations to help in the development of natural resource conservation programs.
They are helping to solve water-control problems of the Blue Nile Basin in Ethiopia, assisting Pakistani geologists in a countrywide assessment of mineral and fuel resources, and encouraging the working of untapped resources in such widely separated countries as Thailand, Turkey, and Peru.
At the same time, hundreds of trainees from scores of foreign countries are studying in Department laboratories, pilot plants, and research stations under the tutelage of Americans working to share their knowledge with fellow scientists from all parts of the globe.
Contributions by researchers of the Department's Bureau of Commercial Fisheries contributed importantly to the success of the FAO International Conference on Fish in Nutrition held in September 1961 in Washington, D.C., and attended by more than 300 scientists from 35 nations and international organizations.
Also, Bureau vessels and personnel will participate in the international cooperative investigations of the tropical Atlantic, a joint program of several nations concerned with an oceanographie study of the waters of the Atlantic Ocean between South America and Africa in 1963.
The world has undergone mighty changes since the days of the early conservationists.
Enormous population gains and swift technological development have combined to create resource pressures which would have been totally inconceivable even a few decades ago.
The two Roosevelts will live in history for their accomplishments in the field of conservation, but the bold new programs associated with their terms of office would be far from adequate to cope with the altered needs of today—or the multiplied needs of tomorrow.
In the past it was sufficient to concentrate on resource management, to curb waste and destruction.
Today, while these elements of conservation remain essential, a vital new factor has been added—the need to apply the great discoveries of science to the task of "creating" new resources and enlarging the use of those existing.
There can be no question that scientific and social research must be the bedrock of our planning and action programs in the time ahead.
Our investment in conservation research now will determine the environment in which our children will live, and the growth potential of the economy they inherit.
The leaders of private industry are wisely making huge investments in research, but the responsibility for basic conservation research must fall heavily on government; first, because governments must consider a longer time span than individuals; and, second, because governments can best take account of the uncertainties of the future.
Research as a basis for planning and action is nowhere better illustrated than in the problem of water resources.
We do not yet have adequate knowledge to be able to predict the effects of upstream developments in a river basin on downstream regulation and use; nor do we understand the long-term effects of flood control measures on the natural regime of streams and flood plains, or the behavior of ground water reservoirs.
To find the highest and best uses of known resources, we need better ways to combine the tools of economic projection and physical research.
It was for this reason—and to attune Departmental programs as rapidly as possible to the new age of scientific ascendancy in conservation—that the Department in 1961 announced appointment of a Science Advisor to the Secretary.
While giving increasing emphasis to scientific development, we must also keep in mind the fact that education is the key both to the techniques and the ethic of conservation.
We must produce more young people with the skills needed for resource development, broad knowledge of the social, economic and technical factors that play upon each other in this field, and the idealism and farsightedness that will give them a deep concern for the future.
Further, one or our most pressing needs is the establishment of a Youth Conservation Corps to conserve and develop the capacities of our two most precious national assets—our youth and our natural resources.
The Youth Conservation Corps, as supported by the Administration, would provide for agreements with Federal and State agencies for the use of Corps trainees in carrying out conservation programs of those agencies.
It would provide employment on useful work that gives dignity to those performing it—and it would instill in our youth an appreciation of the natural world and an understanding of the land and our dependence upon it.
Obviously, a great deal remains to be done in fulfilling our national conservation goals.
But the progress of the past 2 years has placed us well on our way toward a record of achievement unmatched since the Administrations of the two Roosevelts.
If current momentum is maintained—and it appears certain that it will be in the years immediately ahead—the Nation can feel a new confidence in the adequacy of natural resource supplies to meet the rapidly growing needs, both of today and tomorrow.
As President Kennedy has said, if we continue on our present course we can not only repay our debt to the past, but meet our obligations to the future.
The Secretary of the Interior—as head of a major executive department of the Federal Government-serves as a member of the Cabinet of the President of the United States and the principal Federal executive officer charged with the administration of programs to conserve and to develop the natural resources of the United States.
The Secretary—assisted by the Under Secretary—directs and supervises the activities of the 24 bureaus and offices of the Department of the Interior.
The Under Secretary, with the exception of certain matters requiring the personal attention of the Secretary, has the full authority of the Secretary on any matter which comes before him.
Management of some 553 million acres of public-domain lands and mineral leasing responsibilities for all other federally owned lands, as well as on the Federal areas off the coasts of our Nation.
Marketing of electric power from plants with an installed capacity of about 12 million kilowatts, derived from federally constructed water, and flood, and navigational projects.
Providing irrigation water for more than 8 million acres of agricultural lands in the arid and semiarid West which, for the most part, produce high-quality nonsurplus foods and fibers, worth $1 billion annually.
Exercising Federal trust responsibilities for about 350,000 Indians, working constantly to improve the natural and human resources of the Indians.
Administration, economic improvement, social and political betterment in the remaining territorial areas of the United States—Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, and the United Nations-mandated Trust Territory of the Pacific.
Increasing the mineral and fuel potentials of the Nation by assisting technically—and in the case of strategic minerals, financially—in developing and improving mining methods and geologic knowledge, and by promotion of conservation through wise utilization of our mineral and fuel resources.
Protecting and administering almost 200 national parks, monuments, and historic sites, and creating new recreational areas at multipurpose water resource projects—as well as making publie lands available for recreational needs to States and municipalities and providing planning aids to States.
The various recreational lands and areas of the Department are visited by over 125 million Americans annually.
Promoting the conservation and development of our vital sport and commercial fish populations and natural wildlife resources and protecting these resources from unnecessary depletion and selfish use.
Surveying the water and mineral resources of the Nation with an eye to the future and providing for the basic geologic and topographic mapping of the Nation.
Directing and coordinating the national effort to achieve the economical conversion of the waters of the oceans and brackish water into fresh water for human use.
In addition, the Secretary also exercises delegated defense mobilization responsibilities related to minerals, fuels, electric power, and commercial fisheries.
As the principal conservation agency of the Federal Government, the Department of the Interior is engaged in activities which daily affect the lives of all Americans.
The term, "Interior," is actually a misnomer—for the Department should more properly be called the Department of Natural Resources.
Representatives of the Department are at work today around the globe.
Employees are engaged in resource conservation activities in every State of the Nation, in our few remaining territorial areas, in the major oceans, at the north and south polar regions, and by invitation in more than a score of foreign countries.
The Department has major responsibilities in the international field, particularly in foreign trade affecting minerals, fuels, and fishery products.
The Department receives annual appropriations from the Congress.
The Department also returns substantial revenue to the Federal Treasury and to the States from its resource conservation activities.
In recent years, the appropriation of the Department for all purposes has been slightly under $1 billion, and its income from resource conservation and development activities has been about 55 to 60 percent of its appropriations.
The annual investment in resource conservation by the Department continues to create new wealth and to generate new income each year throughout the Nation far beyond the cost of Federal expenditures.
In formulating and administering programs for the management, conservation and development of natural resources, the Department pursues the following objectives: The encouragement of efficient resource use; the assurance of adequately developed resources to meet the requirements of national defense and an expanding economy; the maintenance of productive resource capacity for future generations; the promotion of an equitable distribution of the benefits of publicly owned resources; the discouragement of wasteful exploitation; and the orderly incorporation of Indian groups into national life by providing equal educational and economic opportunity.
In the following pages, the programs of the Department during fiscal 1962 designed to meet these responsibilities and objectives are described.
The Public Land Management segment of the Department's operation enjoyed a unique experience during this fiscal year: the launching of a new Bureau to discharge responsibilities recently assumed by the Department.
Within 90 days after the Outdoor Recreation Resources Review Commission submitted its long-awaited report, the Secretary implemented one of its key recommendations by creating the Bureau of Outdoor Recreation and appointing Dr. Edward Crafts to be its first Director.
In large measure, this significant event symbolizes the unique area of emphasis in land management activities during the year—a year which saw more progress toward catching up with the backlog of recreation land needs than in any similar period in this generation.
The Cape Cod National Seashore became a legal reality and its basic organization was established early in the year; by year's end the Point Reyes and Padre Island National Seashores were on the threshold of Congressional approval, assured of the enactments which followed shortly.
Large areas of the public domain were set aside for Federal-State cooperative development of wildlife resources.
Economic surveys and other planning for Indian tribal land development placed heavy emphasis on recreation potential.
Notwithstanding this emphasis, other programs were moved forward at a gratifying pace.
Substantial progress was made toward agreement with range users on increasing grazing fees to a level more commensurate with the value received.
Provision has been made for equitable settlement with residential occupants of unpatented mining claims.
Assistance to Indian groups has stimulated heightened interest in economic development of reservation resources.
The rehabilitation of American Samoa progressed to the point where it served as a source of pride when the Territory played host to the South Pacific Commission Conference in July, 1962.
New goals have been established for education, health services and political development in the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands and the Congress has more than doubled the authorized level of annual appropriations to achieve these objectives.
The maximum development of America's public land resources remains a stimulating challenge.
The progress made in the past fiscal year offers new incentive to push forward to secure for the whole people the rich benefits which can flow from the wise use of this common inheritance.
Early in the fiscal year 1962 the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the Department of the Interior was provided with a 'roadmap" to guide its future operations in the form of a 77-page report submitted by the Secretary's Task Force on Indian Affairs. At the end of this "New Trail for American Indians" charted by the task force were three prime objectives: (1) Maximum Indian economic self-sufficiency, (2) full participation of Indians in American life, and (3) equal citizenship rights and responsibilities for Indians.
To move toward the accomplishment of these goals, the task force report recommended less emphasis on the purely custodial functions of the Bureau, greater concentration of time, energy, and funds on fostering fuller development of both the human and natural resources on Indian reservations.
Viewed as a whole, fiscal 1962 was for the Bureau largely a period of reorganization, program planning, and 'tooling up" for a heightening of development activity on the reservations.
With two members of the task force (Philleo Nash and James E. Officer) joining the Bureau as Commissioner and Associate Commissioner in September, further momentum was given to these trends.
In October, the Bureau brought together at Denver, Colo., all of its agency superintendents for the first nationwide meeting of these officials since 1938.
Later in the year, an administrative reorganization was accomplished not only in Washington but in area offices and agencies—combining in one new division all operating units directly concerned with economic development.
The meeting at Denver was especially important since it assembled under one roof the policymakers from Washington, the intermediate supervisors from the 10 area offices, and the agency superintendents with their direct responsibilities for translating policies and plans into tangible results on the reservations.
Discussion at the meeting was largely focused on the task force report and the steps necessary for effectuating its major recommendations.
The Secretary of the Interior and the Assistant Secretary for Public Land Management as well as most of the top staff from the Bureau's Washington office actively participated in the conference.
Reorganization of the Bureau along economic development lines was discussed at the Denver conference and put fully into effect several months later.
Under the plans that were finally worked out, all the resource functions of the Bureau (agricultural assistance, forestry, real estate appraisals, real property management, road construction and maintenance) were brought into closer relationship with the industrial development work and the revolving credit program within the structure of a new Division of Economic Development.
In the Washington office the new Division also included a program planning staff and a specialist in housing.
In addition, a new position of Economic Adviser to the Commissioner (to work closely with but outside of the new Division) was created and filled during the year and plans were formulated for recruiting in fiscal 1963 a substantial number of economic development specialists with training in the social sciences for the staffs of agencies, area offices, and the Washington headquarters.
The studies undertaken with ARA funds in the latter part of the fiscal year embrace a wide range of potential economic developments to benefit Indians on reservations and Alaska natives.
Altogether 19 separate studies were initiated involving 15 reservations in 12 States as well as native villages of Alaska.
Seven of the studies are focused on the possibilities of developing recreational facilities or tourist attractions as a source of employment and revenue for Indians; two are aimed at providing better inventories of timber resources; two are concerned with the development of mineral resources; and others cover such diverse fields as the marketing of native arts and crafts produced in Alaska, the managerial skills of Indians on the Pyramid Lake Reservation in Nevada, and the feasibility of a food processing plant on the Colorado River Reservation in Arizona.
Along with this overshadowing emphasis on economic development, many other activities of major importance took place during the year.
The accelerated program of school construction, initiated in the spring of 1961 to eliminate unsafe and obsolete structures and provide sufficient classroom space for all Indian children needing education in Federal facilities as soon as possible, moved encouragingly forward.
Tribal operations officers were established at all area offices and many of the agencies to help tribes improve their political and business organizations along more up-to-date and efficiently functioning lines.
A broad range of activities was undertaken in the educational field to improve English language capabilities of Indians pupils, to provide more intensive instruction in the arts for young Indians with capabilities and inclinations along this line, to upgrade further the quality of teaching in all Bureau schools, and to deal with widespread problems such as dropouts and lack of educational motivation.
The scope of the Bureau's adult vocational training program was widened as a result of Congressional action increasing the appropriation authorization for the program from $3.5 to $7.5 million and appropriating an additional $750,000 for use in fiscal 1962.
A fishery management specialist was added to the staff of the Bureau's area office at Portland to help Oregon and Washington tribes make more effective use of their commercial fish resources.
In the final month of the fiscal year a three-man task force appointed by the Secretary visited Bureau installations in Alaska and consulted with people in the native villages on steps needed to improve Bureau operations in the far northern State.
The prime significance of the Bureau's action in establishing a new Division of Economic Development, headed by an Assistant Commissioner, is that it brings more sharply into focus all those activities of the Bureau that can contribute directly to the growth of a healthier and more dynamic economic climate on the reservations.
These include the programs of agricultural assistance (irrigation construction and maintenance, range management, and agricultural extension), the forestry work, activities connected with the leasing of Indian lands for mineral development or surface use, the construction and maintenance of roads linking up remote Indian localities with major marketing centers or transportation arteries, the revolving credit program to supply the financial lifeblood (over and beyond that available from ordinary sources) needed for tribal and individual Indian economic enterprises, and the industrial development program to assist tribes in encouraging the establishment of private manufacturing plants in localities where they will provide tribal members with greater opportunities for year-round employment.
Because the potentialities for economic growth vary greatly from reservation to reservation—depending on the type and quantity of physical resources, the availability of manpower and skills, proximity to markets, and many other factors—comprehensive planning for each tribal jurisdiction is an essential first step in any orderly and fully effective program of economic advancement.
To give tribes greater technical help in this process, the Bureau formulated plans during the year to strengthen the planning liaison function at the agency level and to provide field specialists in various aspects of economic development in the fiscal year 1963.
In fiscal 1962, considerable impetus was given to planning at the reservation level by the availability of loans and grants under the program of the Area Redevelopment Administration, Department of Commerce.
Indian reservations are specifically mentioned as potentially eligible for assistance in the Area Redevelopment Act of May 1, 1961 and the Bureau has maintained close liaison with ARA since the beginning of its program.
During the past fiscal year, 51 reservation areas, encompassing 56 reservations and 4 native areas in Alaska, were designated 'Reservation Redevelopment Areas" under the eligibility standards in the Area Redevelopment Act.
Once this designation was made, the first step in moving to secure ARA assistance was the formulation of a preliminary overall economic development program (OEDP) for the designated area.
With Bureau help, preliminary OEDP's were prepared for 27 of the reservation areas and submitted to ARA.
Twenty of these were given provisional approval by ARA and the others were awaiting such approval at the close of the period.
First steps were also taken on the preparation of comprehensive OEDP's which are required within one year after tentative approval of the preliminary documents.
To lay a solid factual basis for economic development enterprises on Indian reservations, 19 studies were launched in 1962 with funds supplied by the Area Redevelopment Administration.
Seven of these were focused on the feasibility of tourist attractions like the excellent trout streams which have been developed by the White Mountain Apache recreational enterprise in Arizona.
The 19 studies to determine the economic feasibility of various types of economic developments were made possible by ARA technical assistance grants for contracts totaling $718,343.
Altogether 51 requests for such grants were submitted to ARA by the Bureau; the other 32 were still under consideration at the end of the year.
An important milestone on the road to greater economic growth for the Navajo Tribe of Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah was reached on June 13, 1962, when Presidential approval was given to a congressional act authorizing the Navajo Indian irrigation project.
This culminated 15 years or more of activity on behalf of the project by both the Navajo Tribe and the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
A major development of 1962 was the action of Congress in authorizing the 110,000-acre Navajo Indian irrigation project.
The results that may be expected are depicted in these two photographs taken on the smaller Hogback project which bas been under way on the Navajo Reservation for several years.
The picture at top shows a Navajo family irrigating a Hogback project field.
The bottom one depicts an excellent stand of alfalfa on another part of the project.
This means that as many as 17,000 individual Navajos, nearly one-fourth of the present reservation population, are in position to benefit directly after the project reaches the stage of full operation.
The water supply for the project will come from the Navajo Reservoir on the San Juan River.
Stimulated by the outstanding success of the White Mountain Apache recreational enterprise on the Fort Apache Reservation in Arizona and other evidences of the economic potentialities of outdoor recreation development, many tribes throughout the country have taken an active and growing interest in establishing tourist attractions on their lands.
Under the ARA technical assistance grants, potentialities for recreational development are being studied on the Crow Creek and Lower Brule Reservations in South Dakota; the Warm Springs Reservation in Oregon; the Red Lake, Grand Portage, Nett Lake, Leech Lake, and White Earth Reservations in Minnesota; the Lac du Flambeau, Lac Courte Oreilles, Bad River, and Red Cliff Reservations in Wisconsin; the Pyramid Lake Reservation in Nevada; the Hopi Reservation in Arizona; the Nez Perce country in Idaho; the Colorado River Reservation in Arizona; and the Mescalero and Acoma Reservations in New Mexico.
On the Fort Berthold Reservation in North Dakota the tribal organization obtained a permit from the Army Corps of Engineers covering the Four Bears recreational area on the manmade lake created by Garrison Dam and is planning for commercial development through a long-term lease.
On the Jicarilla Apache Reservation in New Mexico, Dulce Lake was opened to the public for the first time on July 1, 1961.
It offers excellent fishing opportunities and facilities suitable for anglers.
Fish and wildlife stocking programs are increasing the recreational potential on many reservations as well as providing a source of food for Indian people.
The Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife provides technical advice and, through cooperative agreements with the tribes, furnishes fish to stock tribal waters.
Relationships between the tribes and State game departments generally are improving and in many locations excellent cooperative relationships are enjoyed with better management and better hunting and fishing for Indians and non-Indians the result.
The problems associated with Indian treaty rights, particularly with respect to fishing in the Pacific Northwest, demand increased attention.
The extent of the Indian treaty right to fish without regulation at traditional locations away from the reservations has never been decided by the courts to the complete satisfaction of either the Indians or the sports and commercial fishermen with whom they compete for a share of this resource.
In assigning a fishery management specialist to the Portland office, the Bureau of Indian Affairs hopes to assist the Indians in developing programs for increasing the fish runs in the rivers which they control and in adopting conservation practices which will be acceptable to them and their neighbors and which, properly enforced, will help to lessen the tension between members of these two groups.
Up-to-date inventories of the volume of sawtimber have now been completed on more than 80 percent of the 5.5 million acres of commercially valuable Indian forests.
All of the inventories so far completed have shown a much greater volume than the data previously available.
As a result, it has been possible to increase the annual timber harvest on many reservations without in any way sacrificing or compromising the underlying principles of sustained-yield management.
Under the ARA technical assistance grants, timber inventories were initiated on the Flathead, Blackfeet, and Rocky Boy's Reservations in Montana and the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming.
Another inventory, using BIA funds, was started during the year on the Mescalero Reservation in New Mexico.
Partly as a result of the recently completed inventories, the amount of timber cut from Indian lands in fiscal 1962 increased by 72 million board feet as compared with the previous year and totaled 546 million.
The value of the total cut, however, decreased by about $100,000 to approximately $8 million and the average value per thousand board feet dropped $2.41 to $14.65.
The decrease in average unit value was due partly to the unfavorable market in the forest products industry but more significantly to the cutting of less valuable species, which took place on many reservations as the harvest expanded toward the allowable annual cut.
Table A shows the relationship of Indian timber production to the lumber produced throughout the country during the past 10 calendar years.
Because these data are on a calendar year basis, they differ somewhat from those shown above.
The table does not include data from the Klamath Reservation in Oregon and the Menominee Reservation in Wisconsin where trust and other responsibilities of the Bureau have been brought to an end.
The present mill on the Red Lake Reservation in Minnesota is obsolete and not properly designed to turn out forest products from the large supply of lower valued species available.
The tribe and the Bureau have decided to replace the sawmill with a high-speed band mill which can economically handle the substantial volume of aspen, other hardwoods and jackpine remaining in the forest.
The new sawmill should be in operation by next year.
The present Navajo sawmill produces 15 million board feet annually, but it, too, is becoming obsolete.
The Navajo Tribal Council, with the help of several consultants and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, has decided to construct another mill with an annual capacity of 38 million board feet.
Within a few years, production from the original mill will be discontinued.
The new mill will employ an estimated 300 men in the plant and the woods.
On the Fort Apache Reservation in Arizona a planing mill has operated for many years.
A sawmill was also operated until in recent years it was destroyed by fire.
This function is now being accomplished through contract while the tribe continues to operate the planing mill.
On the basis of an evident substantial increase of the allowable annual harvest of the tribal forest, and on the recommendation of an economic feasibility study, the tribe has begun to expand the enterprise.
Loans have been obtained from the Bureau of Indian Affairs for a new sawmill.
Construction has begun and production should begin in fiscal 1963.
In fiscal 1962 a logging enterprise was organized by the Blackfeet Indians.
With Bureau cooperation, an agreement was executed between the tribal enterprise and the tribe for the purchase of reservation timber.
The enterprise will harvest the timber and sell the logs to a private sawmill to be constructed.
The 1961 fire season was severe throughout the West.
Several large fires burned on three of the Indian reservations in Montana and Washington.
During the season, the Bureau of Indian Affairs suppressed 1,629 fires, which burned 15,379 acres of timberland and 108,679 acres of range and other classes of lands.
The total area burned was one-quarter of 1 percent of the Indian lands requiring protection.
Over $1 million was required to suppress these fires.
One of the important moves involved in the reorganization of the Bureau for economic development was the creation of a new Branch of Real Estate Appraisals in the Division of Economic Development.
Appraisal work was previously handled along with transactions activity by the former Branch of Realty.
The decision to set it apart and seek funds for a larger staff of professional appraisers in the field was motivated by a realization that the rapidly changing patterns of land use over much of the West are increasingly affecting and impinging on Indian land holdings.
In many cases it is known that Indian lands are bringing to tribal and individual owners much less than their full income-producing potential and in some localities profitable opportunities for development are being wholly overlooked.
More extensive professional appraisal work should help greatly to correct these deficiencies.
One of the important functions of the new Branch is to prepare appraisal reports on lands being offered for lease or involved in other types of transactions.
In fiscal 1962, such reports were prepared for about 9,000 individual land transactions and were needed for a total of 45,000.
A second major function of the Branch is the preparation of real estate planning reports which point out the highest and best use that can be made of Indian real properties.
About 20 such reports were completed during the year covering whole reservations or segments thereof.
Expansion of this activity in the future should bring about important increases in the overall income from Indian lands and provide a more solid foundation for balanced programs of economic development on the reservations.
Two coal prospecting permits with option to lease were approved during the vear on the Navajo Reservation in New Mexico.
One covers in excess of 75,000 acres with option to lease as much as 25,000 acres.
The other covers nearly 50,000 acres with option to lease areas containing 150,000,000 tons of coal reserves.
Another similar permit was approved on the Hopi Reservation, Ariz., covering approximately 36,500 acres.
A 3-year mineral prospecting permit was approved on the Papago Reservation, Ariz.
The permit grants an option to as many as 25 mining leases and covers all minerals except oil and gas.
The permit covers approximately 4,335 square miles; all of the Papago Reservation except about 47,000 acres of tribal land that was advertised for competitive bidding at about the same time.
Leasing of Indian lands for oil and gas development brought in a total income of $38,161,000 in bonuses, rents, and royalties.
An additional income of $3.171,000 was realized from leasing for other types of mineral development.
The grand total from mineral leases and surface leasing for agricultural, business, residential, recreational, and other improvement purposes was approximately $51.5 million.
The first sale of oil and gas leases on the lands of the Zuni Reservation in New Mexico was held during the year and brought in bonus offerings totaling over $24,000.
One significant measure of expanding economic activity on Indian reservations was the sharp increase in the number of requests or applications for transactions involving Indian land received by the Bureau during the year.
Altogether, 76,040 requests for transactions of all types were received as compared with 65,255 in fiscal 1961.
Trends in the economics of land use in the United States, and particularly on Indian reservations, suggest that the volume of transaction requests will continue increasing in future years.
A new title plant was established in the area office at Portland, Oreg.
Plans were formulated for setting up similar plants in the area offices at Phoenix, Ariz., and Anadarko, Okla., early in fiscal 1963.
During the year, a pilot project of consolidating fractional ownerships of tracts in '"heirship" status into single ownerships of economically useful size through an extensive program of exchanges was initiated on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota.
If the procedure proves effective and useful, it will have wide applicability on other reservations.
Under a congressional act of September 14, 1961, nearly 70,000 acres of public-domain lands were transferred to eight of the New Mexico Indian pueblos.
The transferred lands were intermingled with other pueblo holdings and have presented troublesome management problems for many years.
Adequate financing is a prerequisite of any program for economic development of Indians.
While total financing has increased from about $43 million to $108 million during the past 10 years, available funds continue to lag behind need.
Of recent years, banks and other lending institutions serving citizens generally have become increasingly conscious that Indian well-being is vital to the well-being of the total area; that Indian resources, both human and physical, are underdeveloped and underutilized; that Indians are entitled to the same assistance as other citizens; and that they present an opportunity for increased business and profit.
Over the past 10 years, the amount of financing furnished Indians from such sources has increased from an estimated $20 million to over $75 million.
One factor which has undoubtedly helped to account for this increase has been action by certain tribal groups such as the Shoshone of Wyoming and the Mescalero Apaches of New Mexico in entering into guaranty agreements covering bank loans made to tribal members who qualify in every way except for adequate security.
Along the same line, the Blackfeet Tribe of Montana has posted a $50,000 guaranty fund which enables a local production credit association to make loans to tribal members who could not qualify under its customary procedures.
The association had nearly $110,000 outstanding in loans under this agreement at the end of the fiscal year.
Two main funds are used in financing Indians through the Bureau.
If a tribe has available money of its own, it is required to use its funds before a loan by the United States is approved.
A total of $22.2 million of tribal funds was being used at the close of the fiscal year.
The second source is a revolving fund for loans authorized by the Congress.
At the close of the fiscal year, loans from the fund totaling about $10.4 million were outstanding.
During the year, the authorization for the revolving fund was increased by the Congress from $17 to $27 million.
An additional $4 million was appropriated, bringing the total to $17,799,600.
Due to its revolving nature, loans totaling over $38 million have been made from the Federal revolving fund, of which $27.5 million has been repaid and $187 thousand cancelled.
Commitments for additional loans totaling $6.4 million were made during 1961 compared with $3.2 million in 1960.
Applications totaling nearly $12 million had either been approved or authorized subject to the availability of funds at the close of the fiscal year.
These applications are mainly for relending operations; however, nearly one-half of the amount is for tribal enterprises and loans to attract industries to operate on or near reservations.
Requests in various stages were pending for almost an additional $40 million.
Provision of adequate housing has been recognized universally as a basic essential to effectuating improvement in social outlook and economic betterment of a group of people.
Bureau efforts to accelerate improvements in the notoriously substandard housing of Indians have been directed toward opening up Indian reservations to the financial assistance already available through Federal housing agencies to nonreservation areas.
Progress along this line has involved accommodation on the part of all agencies and institutions concerned to the system of land tenure which is characteristic of Indian landholdings.
A comprehensive memorandum of understanding was executed in fiscal 1962 between the Bureau and the Federal Housing Administration which will provide mortgage insurance on leasehold estates on Indian trust lands.
Negotiations were also intiated with the Federal National Mortgage Association for the establishment of a special fund for the purchase of insured mortgages on leasehold estates on Indian trust lands.
In the public housing field significant advances were made following a determination by the Public Housing Administration that tribal groups can participate in the benefits of its low-rent housing program if they are recognized as governmental entities and projects are located on tribal lands.
In line with this determination a number of tribes adopted ordinances establishing local housing authorities.
On the Fort Apache Reservation in Arizona eight families joined forces during 1962 in a "self-help" bousing venture wbich is being closely studied by the Bureau of Indian Affairs as a key to wider action on other reservations.
The picture at the top shows the type of bousing being replaced, while the photo at the bottom depicts one of the bomes constructed under the venture.
Financing was provided from the tribal loan fund and the labor was furnished by the families working together.
Technical guidance was supplied by a carpenter on the tribal payroll.
It provides for the construction of 88 low-rent units including 23 for housing elderly members of the tribe.
The Standing Rock Sioux Housing Authority has entered into a similar contract in the amount of $1,664,082 for the construction of 100 similar units.
Both of these developments are located near established industries and will afford better living standards for Indian families employed in the plants.
Many of the other tribes are planning to locate their housing projects close to potential industrial sites.
In the latter part of the year the White Mountain Apache Tribe of Arizona started a pilot self-help housing project with eight tribal families participating in the program.
Tribal loans were made to these families for the purchase of materials.
A cooperating agreement was executed by the participants who did all the construction with the assistance of a construction supervisor furnished by the tribe.
The Bureau is exploring the possibility of systematically encouraging and assisting similar self-help housing programs on other reservations throughout the country.
During the year, three industrial plants were completed and one expanded in reservation areas.
When in full operation, they will provide approximately 860 jobs.
To date, 20 industrial plants have been established on or near Indian reservations as a result of the coordinated efforts of Indian tribes, local communities, other Government agencies, and representatives of the Bureau.
When in full operation, it is anticipated that the plants will provide about 3,200 jobs, approximately 70 percent of which will be filled by Indian workers.
At Chandler, Ariz., Harry Winston, Inc., internationally famous diamond merchants of New York City, started operating in May 1962 their new plant which has 40 Indian employees and plans to take on 30 new Indian trainees per month until a work force of approximately 200 is reached.
The Shelton Basket Corp., a cooperative venture of the Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Lake Superior Chippewas and the community of Hayward, Wis., expanded its operations by establishing an ammunition box division in the spring of 1962 in order to carry out a supply contract with the Department of Defense.
This was believed to be the first contract ever awarded by a Government agency to a corporation controlled by American Indians.
Including the new division, the company employs 108 workers, 77 of whom are Indians.
Further progress was made during 1962 in the development of private industries that furnish year-round employment for Indian people on reservations.
A fishing tackle plant on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, when in full operation, bas a payroll of 380 workers.
The company is known as Plasteck Central, Inc., and was formed by the citizens of Wewoka for the primary purpose of purchasing a plasties manufacturing firm and establishing the operations in Wewoka.
The plant produces aircraft cockpit illuminating control panels for military and defense contractors, and will make panels for automobiles, computers, and other uses.
Production started in November 1961, and the plant is now employing 20 workers, 10 of whom are Indians.
A result of the cooperative liaison activities of representatives for the Small Business Administration, the Ashland Industrial Development Corp., Wisconsin, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs is the location of the Swiss Precision Manufacturing Division plant in Ashland by the Rainier Co., Inc., of New York City, to make precision gears and related items.
Operations started in June 1962 with approximately 30 workers, 13 of whom are Indians.
The company anticipates that they will employ between 150 and 200 workers when in full operation.
The Bad River and Red Cliff Bands of Chippewas will benefit, primarily, from opportunities for Indian employment opened at this plant.
Youth conservation camps are becoming very popular on Indian reservations.
The camps first started because tribal officials found a need for healthful recreation and education in the conservation and development of natural resources to occupy the youth during the summer months.
The youngsters get instruction and demonstrations in the conservation and development of natural resources and are instructed in health, recreation, safety, and other activities.
Technicians of the Bureau of Indian Affairs work with the tribes in these camps and furnish instruction.
In fiscal 1962, personnel from the Bureau's Branch of Land Operations, county agents, and land-grant college extension service specialists participated in more than 10,000 meetings held in carrying out extension work with Indians.
In addition to group meetings, emphasis was placed on working with individual Indian families through farm and home calls by extension agents to stimulate interest in community activities, improved livestock and crop production, and home management practices.
During the year there were approximately 10,000 Indian boys and girls throughout the country participating in 4-H Club activities.
Many received county and statewide recognition for their achievements in project completions and in giving demonstrations.
Indian tribal leaders as well as Indian ranchers and landowners throughout the country are showing increased interest in their range land, its use and management.
Bureau emphasis on reservation economic development planning and range or ranch unit planning and development, coupled with a growing awareness of the economic facts of livestock production, brought this about.
Basic to range use planning is an inventory of the physical resource.
The inventory of Indian rangeland, initiated by the Bureau in 1957, has been progressing at the rate of approximately 3.75 million acres a year.
Work has now been completed on about half of the 42 million acres to be surveyed.
Indian use of the range resource is increasing and 86 percent of it is currently being used by Indian operators.
The livestock industry is of major importance to Indian people and every effort is made to promote better livestock and range management to increase the economic return to the operators.
One result of these efforts is exemplified by the Papago tribal herd range in Arizona.
The Papagos have adopted a supplementary feeding program resulting in a marked increase in the calf crop and weight of livestock sold.
It also enables better use to be made of the range resource.
The range conservationist and Indian livestock operators cooperatively plan for proper range use on the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana.
One factor which has operated for many years to retard full economic and social development on Indian reservations has been the lack of adequate road facilities.
The Bureau's program of road construction and maintenance, which began in 1933, produced many helpful improvements over the years but was so late in getting started and so meagerly financed for a long time that it fell far short of meeting the needs.
In recent years, however, appropriations for this work have been much more generous and striking progress has been achieved in many areas.
In fiscal 1962 nearly 400 miles of Bureau roads were black-topped and the cumulative effects of work done in earlier years became increasingly apparent.
These effects were noticeable in the larger number of Indians driving late model pickups or shopping in supermarkets and in the growing number of industrial concerns which were finding it possible to operate in previously isolated reservation areas.
These tangible evidences of progress in fiscal 1962 held promise for better school attendance and other manifestations of economic and social advancement on reservations in the years ahead.
To a greater extent than many people realize, the Bureau of Indian Affairs is today, and has been for many years, basically, an education agency.
Funds spent for the operation of its extensive school system both on and off reservations together with construction appropriations used for building or rehabilitating various types of school-connected facilities account, in total, for more than 60 percent of the Bureau's budget.
Involvement of Bureau personnel is in a similar ratio.
And even some of the Bureau's more technical programs, such as forestry and agricultural assistance, are largely educational in nature.
The fiscal year 1962 was an unusually active one in Indian education and brought significant advances on many fronts.
Despite the impressively large amount of Indian school construction accomplished over the 8-year period beginning in 1953, there were still nearly 9,000 Indian children from 6 through 18 years of age out of school in the spring of 1961 and almost 5,000 of these were not enrolled because of a lack of classroom space.
This problem of insufficient space was centered chiefly on the Navajo Reservation in Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah; in the native communities of Alaska; and on the Choctaw Reservation in Mississippi.
In addition, many of the Bureau's schools were badly overcrowded; many, built shortly before or after the turn of the present century, were seriously obsolete; many had structural or other deficiencies that made them unsafe or insanitary for further continued use.
Through an accelerated program of school construction, launched in the spring of 1961, the Bureau aims to accomplish three prime objectives over a period of approximately 4 fiscal years: (1) Elimination of the most serious overcrowding in Federal Indian school facilities; (2) correction or elimination of the deficiencies that represent health or safety hazards; and (3) construction of enough additional classrooms and related facilities to accommodate all Indian children needing education under Bureau auspices.
Since the number of Indian children in the school-age bracket grows larger every year, the total capacity of the system will obviously have to be increased by considerably more than 5,000 seats in order to achieve the third of these objectives.
In fiscal 1962 the Bureau completed 18 school construction projects, adding 675 classroom seats to the capacity of its system, and initiated 40 more projects which will eventually accommodate an additional 2,786 Indian students.
It was an encouraging record for the first full fiscal year under the accelerated program.
Under an accelerated program of school construction the Bureau of Indian Affairs in 1962 completed 18 projects providing classroom space for 675 additional pupils and initiated 40 projects that will eventually make room for 2,786 Indian students.
The classroom building shown above is part of the project completed at the Teec Nos Pos School on the Navajo Reservation.
Among the more important of the completed projects were one adding 249 seats at the Teec Nos Pos School on the Navajo Reservation in Arizona, another adding 120 seats at the Dunseith School on the Turtle Mountain Reservation in North Dakota, and a third contributing 102 additional seats at the Busby School on the Northern Cheyenne Reservation in Montana.
Outstanding projects initiated but not completed during the year included construction of a wholly new facility with 630 classroom seats on the Navajo Reservation at Tuba City, Ariz., and expansion of existing facilities at 7 other locations on the Navajo Reservation.
These latter projects will add 212 seats at the Shonto School, 188 at the Dilcon School, 147 at the Dennehotso School, and 118 at the Hunter's Point School, all on the Arizona portion of the reservation, and 150 seats at the Crownpoint School, 150 at the Pueblo Pintado School, and 136 at the Tohatchi School in the New Mexico reservation area.
During the year education and construction personnel of the Bureau jointly evaluated standards for school construction in the light of changing educational needs.
The standards formerly in use designed principally for elementary children, were revised and new standards were established for the construction of facilities for high school students and dormitories for older children.
These new standards will provide more adequate facilities for urgently needed libraries and laboratory classes in science courses; and the dormitories will of themselves increase learning opportunities for Indian children who come mainly from economically disadvantaged homes.
The approved standards represent a very important step toward education of better quality for Indian children.
For many years the Bureau of Indian Affairs has stressed English language teaching in its schools.
Today it is conducting research in modern "language laboratory" techniques to speed up the process.
Emphasis on the teaching of English as a second language continued throughout Bureau schools during fiscal 1962.
Several articles were published in Indian Education, a semimonthly publication addressed to all Bureau education personnel, to clarify (1) the present status of this subject in Bureau schools, (2) the fundamental principles underlying the teaching of language, (3) goals that must be achieved if learning English as a second language is effective, and (4) techniques indicated if the goals and principles are to be realized.
The Intermountain School at Brigham, Utah, began a research project on the use of the language laboratory to assist Indian pupils in speaking correct English.
This laboratory and the series of films, "Let's Learn English," developed by the U.S. Information Agency, were introduced to education supervisory personnel at a Bureau-wide workshop.
Plans were made for additional research on the best uses that Bureau schools can make of the laboratory and films to improve the learning of English as a second language.
Experiments were carried on in the Albuquerque and Shiprock schools in adapting special techniques of teaching English as a second language.
The Navajo Agency orientation workshop carried on successful projects which assisted new teachers to understand quickly the problems of non-English speaking pupils who are beginning in functional situations to learn English as a second language.
The summer programs which the Bureau initiated on a trial basis for students in its schools during the vacation months of 1960 were continued and expanded in 1961.
Total enrollment rose from 2,200 to 7,246.
The four main categories of these programs were recreation, academic instruction, student employment, and field trips.
The main features of the recreation program were sports and games.
The academic programs emphasized remedial work in the skill subjects with special attention given to oral and written English.
Pupils who had special learning problems during the regular term were given an opportunity to catch up during the summer months.
The program of summer employment for students answered one of the most important needs of teenagers—the opportunity to earn money through their own efforts.
The field trips provided under the summer program were designed to broaden the Indian child's horizon by giving him many and varied experiences beyond the restricted scope of his life on the reservation.
Indian youngsters were given the opportunity to leave their reservation areas, some for the first time, and participate in activities that are taken for granted by non-Indian youngsters.
An evaluation of the 1961 program revealed a number of benefits.
Juvenile delinquency was substantially reduced in locations where summer programs were in operation.
Academic gains were made during the summer months.
Students were given opportunities to make money, and the background of a number of students was enriched through field trips.
One of the most important results of the program is that a large percentage of the participants returned to school.
In August 1961, the Bureau announced plans for converting the Santa Fe Indian School into the Institute of American Indian Arts.
The institute will enroll Indian students from all federally recognized tribes throughout the country and is planned as an accredited senior high school with instruction in the usual academic subjects.
In addition, the curriculum will cover broad as well as specialized training in the creative arts, and will prepare the student for vocational opportunities in applied arts and related work.
During fiscal 1962, contracts were let for the construction and conversion of buildings to be completed before the institute opens.
The organization and staffing of the school have progressed to the point where a definite date of October 1, 1962, has been set for the opening.
Two dormitories at the Concho School in Oklahoma have been converted to the Concho Demonstration School.
These dormitories will provide living accommodations, classrooms, and recreation facilities for the educational rehabilitation of approximately 48 students who have dropped out of school or have demonstrated low educational motivation.
The school will serve as a demonstration laboratory for in-service training of guidance and teaching personnel who need help in developing skills and programs in working more effectively with students who are potential dropouts or in need of educational motivation.
Students will be accepted for enrollment in September 1962.
Special attention was given to a program for reemphasizing highquality teaching and for recognizing the superior teacher through promotion to a GS-9 position.
Guidelines and criteria for developing superior teaching, set up previously by representative committees of education personnel from all areas, were distributed for the reaction and assistance of teachers, supervisors, education specialists, and administrators in all areas.
Meetings for this purpose were attended by a very large percent of all Bureau teaching personnel.
Content for the 1962 Bureau-wide education workshop originated in these meetings.
This workshop, held in June, dealt with the improvement of supervisory skills of all personnel in the education program.
The 200 participants contributed materially to its success, and furthered the possibility of putting into effect in the near future the master teacher program and the upgrading of teaching and supervision throughout the school staff.
An account of the origin, development, and accomplishments of the special program in the education of teenage illiterates of the Navajo Tribe was published during 1962.
The purposes to be served by the written account are (1) to make a record of this education program which has served several thousand young Indian people for the past 15 years; and (2) to share with interested educators, and with communities everywhere, the experiences of Bureau education personnel in dealing with a serious and urgent problem of undereducation of teenagers and young adults.
It is expected that this story will have meaning for people in widely scattered parts of the world because it contains principles and guidelines that are central to any sound education program, particularly one that is attempting to meet the needs of an eager but educationally handicapped group of young people.
Interest and support of the education program by Indian parents and tribal officials continued to increase.
A survey made in the spring of 1962 revealed wide participation by Indians in school management and planning groups such as parent-teacher associations, school boards, and school committees.
The survey showed that there are at least 414 PTA groups in which Indian members participate.
In addition, 284 school boards have a total of 367 Indian members.
There are 12 Indian members of Indian commissions and a total of 1,214 Indian members of booster and other community organizations.
There is evidence that such participation is greater than indicated by the survey since responses were not received from every school group.
The Fifth Annual Conference on Navajo Education, planned and directed by the Navajo Tribal Education Committee, brought together large numbers of Bureau education officials, public school and mission school officials, and Navajo tribal officials.
The conference dealt with the status of education of Navajo children and youth, and with the direction which education should take in the next several years.
Following the meeting a planning conference was held involving administrators and specialists concerned with schools enrolling older Navajo students.
At this time goals for the education programs were reexamined and redefined, and plans were made to begin study and revision of the curriculum guides used in these schools.
A 3-week workshop, "Trends in Indian Education," was conducted in 1962 for the benefit of public school teachers who teach considerable numbers of Indian children.
This workshop, held under the auspices of the Eastern Montana College of Education, took place on the college campus.
Serving as workshop resource persons were personnel from the Bureau's education staff, the Director of Indian Education from the Montana State Education Department, a Crow Tribal Council member and local school board members, and a public school principal.
Twenty-six public school teachers completed the workshop course, earning from 3 to 5 hours of college credit.
Excerpts from their writings in the course were used in Indian Education articles.
Many Indian people are at a disadvantage in their communities by not having attained sufficient language, social or economic skills to permit them to be self-sufficient in modern living.
For the benefit of educationally disadvantaged adult Indians who can qualify for such services, the Bureau conducts special education programs where the need and desire are indicated.
Adult education teaching units have been established upon the request and with the concurrence of the tribal governing bodies at 27 agencies and locations throughout the United States.
These teaching units are now serving approximately 127 Indian communities, and offer a wide variety of instruction.
Over the past 6 or 7 years approximately 6,700 adult Indians have been participants in formal and informal learning activities under this program.
Of this number, 51 completed the required courses for equivalent high school graduation.
The Bureau continued its work of encouraging and promoting the enrollment of qualified Indian students in courses of higher education.
This is effected through the guidance programs in Bureau schools, through close cooperation with public and mission schools, and through coordinating Federal grant, loan, and working scholarship programs with scholarship aid programs of State and tribal group organizations and with other non-Federal organizations and institutions.
Over 4,500 Indian students were enrolled in schools above the high school level in 1962; approximately 2,900 of these were enrolled in college courses leading to a degree.
Enrollment of Indian children of school age increased 4 percent in fiscal 1962 as compared to the preceding year.
Of the 117,562 enrolled, 59.2 percent attended public schools, 33.1 percent were in Federal schools, and 7.7 percent were in mission and other private schools.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs in fiscal 1962 operated 263 schools with an enrollment of 42,045 including those under 6 and over 18 years of age.
In addition, dormitory facilities were provided at 20 locations for students who attended public schools.
Dormitory operations of this type are used to meet unusual emergency needs and do not reflect a permanent pattern for educating Indians.
The long-range objective of the Indian education program calls for the eventual enrollment of all Indian children in public schools.
In a number of States this objective has been reached.
In other States having large Indian populations the number going into the publie schools increases annually.
During 1962 public school enrollment increased by 4,664 students.
Since the fiscal year 1960, Bureau reports have not included the number of Indian children enrolled in public schools in California, Idaho, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, Oregon, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin, where responsibility for their education has been accepted by the States, and Federal schools for State residents are no longer operated.
In the vital field of tribal planning to promote the general welfare of tribal members, significant advances were made during the year by the leadership of the Nez Perce Tribe of Idaho, the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, and the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe of North and South Dakota.
An act of April 24, 1961 (75 Stat. 45), provided that the $7,157,- 605.06 awarded the Nez Perce by the Indian Claims Commission could be used as the tribe's governing body saw fit after approval by the Secretary of the Interior.
Last September, the Secretary approved a program for use of the judgment funds providing for a per capita payment of $750 to each of the 2,064 tribal members with the remainder of approximately $4,024,195 to be programed for reservation development.
Currently, a committee composed of leading business and professional men in the area, as well as tribal leaders, is working closely with Bureau representatives to determine the best plan for providing lasting benefits for all tribal members.
The Omaha Tribe of Nebraska has formulated an energetic development program.
It was approved by the Secretary of the Interior and details for each phase of the program were being worked out by tribal leaders at the end of the reporting period.
Bureau members are assisting the tribe in furthering its aims and encouraging modification of organizational documents to permit the tribe to better avail itself of facilities offered by other Government agencies.
The program includes plans for land purchase and a tribal scholarship grant program, development loans to individuals, and a plan for the formulation of the tribe's overall economic development.
The act of September 14, 1961 (75 Stat. 508), authorized the Secretary to prepare a membership roll to serve as a basis for the distribution of the $2,900,000 judgment awarded the tribe.
A per capita payment of $750 has been approved and approximately $1,200,000 of the award is currently earmarked for the development program.
About 2,500 Indians will be involved.
The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe of North and South Dakota is also realizing continuing gains from its $9 million rehabilitation program made possible by settlements under the act of September 2, 1958 (72 Stat. 1762).
The major portion of the family plan phase of this program (described in some detail in the 1960 annual report) has been completed.
In fiscal 1962 the tribe completed construction of a tribally operated bowling alley and a greatly needed administration building.
Essential for tribal development is improving tribal organization.
In fiscal 1962 the Bureau broadened and intensified its activities to provide tribes with technical aid in bringing about such improvements.
An outstanding development was the organization of the Miccosukee Tribe of Florida under the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984).
At an election held December 17, 1961, the proposed constitution and bylaws of the Miccosukee were adopted and the Secretary of the Interior approved the document on January 11, 1962.
A major barrier to improving the lot of the 102 individuals on the Miccosukee roll was thus removed.
The updating of constitutions by amendment to permit more effective tribal operation continued.
The Devils Lake Sioux in North Dakota began functioning under a revised constitution and bylaws and in June approval was given to amendments of the constitution and bylaws of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe of South Dakota.
The changes at Rosebud will permit the tribe to take greater advantage of services of other Government agencies.
The Florida Seminoles changed in its entirety the article of their constitution dealing with enrollment.
The Bureau, to provide tribes with greater assistance in achieving more effective government, appointed during the year for the first time area tribal operations officers who will devote their time to working with tribal groups within their area on all questions of tribal operation.
A special task force visited many of the native villages throughout Alaska during June and gathered material to add to the Task Force Report on Indian Affairs made to the Secretary on July 10, 1961, covering Indian areas in other parts of the United States.
Associate Commissioner James E. Officer represented the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Prior to the task force visit, the Bureau assigned a tribal operations officer to the Juneau area office to help the native communities develop appropriate organizations for the management of their economic affairs.
Although Department of the Interior responsibility for several tribes was officially terminated during the reported year under the provisions of laws enacted in the 1950's, the Bureau continued a friendly interest in the success of these tribes and their members in their new era of self-government and self-management as citizens of their respective States.
Revocation of the Federal constitution and bylaws of the Catawba Tribe of South Carolina on July 1, 1962, by the Secretary (under authority of the act of September 21, 1959) marked the end of the relationship that existed between the tribe and the Government.
Before this termination action the Bureau made a final roll of the Catawbas and each of the 631 members received his or her share of the tribal assets valued at $186,774.40.
Some 369 members took their share in land (1,800 acres), and 262 members chose instead money obtained from the sale of unselected land (1,400 acres).
The State of South Carolina still holds in trust for the Catawbas a 640-acre tract known as the Old Reservation.
Termination notices were published during the reporting year for 7 of the 41 California rancherias named in the act of August 18, 1958 (72 Stat. 619), after the assets on each rancheria were given to the Indians in accordance with a previously approved distribution plan.
Seven rancherias had previously been terminated.
The provisions of the plans of 24 more rancherias are being worked out as a major project in California.
The title insurance companies in that State are questioning the insurability of titles given to the Indians under the act, and the issuance of deeds by the area director has been halted until this question is resolved.
The Public Health Service is canvassing the rancherias under termination to ascertain on which rancherias it can install water and/or sewerage facilities under Public Law 86-121 before termination takes place.
Federal supervision over the affairs of the Klamath Indians of Oregon came to an end August 13, 1961.