The Secretary of the Interior—as head of a major executive department of the Federal Government—serves as a member of the Cabinet of the President of the United States and the principal Federal executive officer charged with the administration of programs to conserve and to develop the natural resources of the United States.
The Secretary—assisted by the Under Secretary—directs and supervises the activities of the 24 bureaus and offices of the Department of the Interior.
The Under Secretary, with the exception of certain actions requiring the personal attention of the Secretary, has the full authority of the Secretary on any matter which comes before him.
Management of some 553 million acres of public-domain lands and mineral leasing responsibilities for all other federally owned lands, as well as on the Federal areas off the coasts of our Nation.
Marketing of electric power from plants with an installed capacity of about 13.6 million kilowatts, derived from federally constructed water, and flood, and navigational projects.
Providing irrigation water for about 8 million acres of agricultural lands in the arid and semiarid West which, for the most part, produce high-quality nonsurplus foods and fibers, worth $1.2 billion annually.
Exercising Federal trust responsibilities for about 350,- 000 Indians, working constantly to improve the natural and human resources of the Indians.
Administration, economic improvement, social and political betterment in the remaining territorial areas of the United States—Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, and the United Nations-mandated Trust Territory of the Pacific.
Increasing the mineral and fuel potentials of the Nation by assisting technically—and in the case of strategic minerals, financially—in developing and improving mining methods and geologic knowledge, and by promotion of conservation through wise utilization of our mineral and fuel resources.
Protecting and administering almost 200 national parks, monuments, and historic sites, and creating new recreational areas at multipurpose water resource projects—as well as making public lands available for recreational needs to States and municipalities and providing planning aids to States.
The various recreational lands and areas of the Department are visited by over 125 million Americans annually.
Promoting the conservation and development of our vital sport and commercial fish populations and natural wildlife resources and protecting these resources from unnecessary depletion and wasteful use.
Surveying the water and mineral resources of the Nation for present and future needs and providing for the basic geologic and topographic mapping of the Nation.
Directing and coordinating the national effort to achieve the economical conversion of the waters of the oceans and brackish water into fresh water for human use.
In addition, the Secretary also exercises delegated defense mobilization responsibilities related to minerals, fuels, electric power, and commercial fisheries.
As the principal conservation agency of the Federal Government, the Department of the Interior is engaged in activities which daily affect the lives of all Americans.
The term, "Interior," is actually a misnomer—the Department might be described more accurately as a department of natural resources.
Representatives of the Department are at work today around the globe.
Employees are engaged in resource conservation activities in every State of the Nation, in our few remaining territorial areas, in the major oceans, at the north and south polar regions, and by invitation in more than a score of foreign countries.
The Department has major responsibilities in the international field, particularly in foreign trade affecting minerals, fuels, and fishery products.
The Department receives annual appropriations from the Congress.
The Department also returns substantial revenue to the Federal Treasury and to the States from its resource conservation activities.
In recent years, the appropriation of the Department for all purposes has been slightly under $1 billion, and its income from resource conservation and development activities has been about 55 to 60 percent of its appropriations.
The annual investment in resource conservation by the Department continues to create new wealth and to generate new income each year throughout the Nation far beyond the cost of Federal expenditures.
In formulating and administering programs for the management, conservation and development of natural resources, the Department pursues the following objectives: The encouragement of efficient resource use; the assurance of adequately developed resources to meet the requirements of national defense and an expanding economy; the maintenance of productive resource capacity for future generations; the promotion of equitable distribution of the benefits of publicly owned resources; the discouragement of wasteful exploitation; and the orderly incorporation of Indian groups into national life by providing equal educational and economic opportunity.
In the following pages, the programs of the Department during fiscal 1963 designed to meet these responsibilities and objectives are described.
A program Assistant Secretary in the Department of the Interior must bring the Secretary's policy direction to bear, and make decisions, on the issues presented by the programs under his jurisdiction; and he must perform the liaison involved in securing public, political, and congressional acceptance of those policy decisions.
As in any dynamic organization, the number and complexity of such issues seem never to diminish.
As the Public Land Management bureaus enter fiscal year 1964, their workload is no less than it was a year previous.
Progress can be claimed, however, in the fact that many of the pending issues are new ones and a substantial number that were on the agenda as fiscal 1963 opened have been resolved satisfactorily.
A major center of attention involved the fixing of a more reasonable price for the forage which the public lands furnish to the western livestock industry.
Effective March 1, 1963, the fee structure for each animal unit month was increased slightly more than 50 percent.
Despite small pockets of vigorous dissent, this was accomplished with the general acquiescence of responsible range users and defended in extensive hearings before Congress.
Largely due to the sympathetic cooperation of the Congress, also, a vexatious problem of long standing was resolved when Public Law 87-851 provided an equitable formula for regularizing unauthorized residential occupancy of invalid mining claims.
Failure in this respect would have threatened the economy of a whole region and exposed a valuable resource to inestimable damage from pest infestation and fire.
Systematic attack on the backlog of soil and water conservation work was started through substantial increases in appropriations, to be concentrated in designated project areas where improvements can be measured in businesslike fashion.
Two major units were added to the National Park System with the creation of Point Reyes and Padre Island National Seashores.
Major land acquisition efforts and funds were concentrated on Cape Cod so key tracts might be made available for public use at the earliest date.
Three congressional committees focused their attention on the concessions management policies followed by the Park Service.
To meet the various issues raised, these policies have been restated, looking toward legislative restatement.
On a day-to-day basis, continued acceleration of the number of park visits and use and conflicts between the pure preservationist philosophy and the need for intensive development to meet public demand posed problems demanding immediate decisions.
A committee of eminent scientists and wildlife management experts formulated a broad program for effective husbandry of this resource.
Congress enacted a legislative charter for the Bureau of Outdoor Recreation, created by Executive action the previous year.
The Bureau immediately undertook the major projects for which it was created: securing enactment of legislation to establish a fund for supporting expanded National and State recreation development programs and developing standards, policies, and criteria to serve as the basis for a national recreation plan.
The Bureau also was assigned-the responsibility for finding solutions to a series of highly controversial issues which had hampered full development of recreation potential over long periods of time, including the Northern Cascades area, Flaming Gorge Reservoir, the Allagash region, Assateague Island, and future policies for the management of free-flowing streams in various parts of the Nation.
Developments affecting the Indian people of the Nation were less dramatic and not as sharply defined as in the other areas of responsibility.
While Congress devoted extensive time and attention to some of the major policy issues which block full development of Indian resources—material and human—no major legislative enactments were forthcoming.
The gross lag in educational and employment opportunities continues as the major deterrent to Indian advancement.
The substantially increased appropriations provided by the Congress have permitted an expanded effort to close the gap, but the process is and will continue to be a methodical one whose results will be felt only over a period of years.
Individual problems of tribal organization, distribution of tribal assets, law and order under local jurisdictional laws, and treaty rights have had to be treated as separate parts of a broad complex.
The administration of territorial affairs was marked by a sharp change in policy regarding one area, a period of marking time on progress toward increased self-government in others, and the need for emergency measures to aid in the recovery of Guam from natural disaster.
Congress doubled the limitation on appropriations for the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
This action, and the actual appropriation which followed, gives meaning to a policy commitment that our relationship to the people of Micronesia should be converted from that of mere passive custodianship to one of positive assistance in raising educational, health, economic, and overall social standards to a level commensurate with those existing in the rest of the world.
Efforts to confer upon the American citizens of Guam and the Virgin Islands greater latitude to manage their own affairs and elect their own leadership did not bear fruit in 1963.
However, the framework for such a shift in national policy is fully developed and at year's end was before Congress for its further consideration.
Overshadowing these developments, however, was the crushing blow dealt the island of Guam by successive typhoons.
While loss of life and serious personal injury was gratifyingly low, property damage and destruction of public facilities created extreme hardship and a heavy impact on the local economy.
Emergency measures by the military departments, Office of Emergency Planning, the Red Cross, and other agencies enabled Guam to reestablish normal activity after a relatively short period.
However, permanent reconstruction requires capital investment far beyond local capability to finance.
In close cooperation with local officials, this Department has assumed the responsibility for securing assistance in the form of Federal grants and loans.
Early in the 1963 fiscal year—on August 2, 1962—President Kennedy received at the White House the first group of 10 Indian and Eskimo young men from Alaska who had completed an 18- month course of electronics training in New York City under auspices of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and who were headed for high-paying jobs in their native State.
Ten months later on June 7, 1963—the U.S. Supreme Court finally settled a decadesold controversy between the Navajo and Hopi Tribes over the ownership of a 2,500,000-acre rectangle in northern Arizona.
These were two of the outstanding events of the period in the field of Indian affairs and both had important economic implications.
The Alaskan trainees were, in a sense, a pioneer group—the first in what may eventually be a long line of Indians and Eskimos from the northernmost State who take an intensive course of electronics instruction in preparation for jobs at defense and communications installations in the far reaches of their native land.
Their visit to the White House was one of the most interesting phases of the adult vocational training program which the Bureau of Indian Affairs began in 1958 and which has equipped thousands of Indians from reservations in the older States with marketable job skills.
Training for natives of Alaska was carried out under an agreement between the Bureau and the Radio Corp. of America.
Under its terms the first contingent was trained at the RCA Institute in New York City; subsequent groups have been and will be enrolled at the similar institute in Los Angeles, Calif.
The first 10 Alaskan natives to complete the 18-month RCA electronics training program are shown being received by President Kennedy prior to reporting for employment on communications.
At year's end, 10 more Alaskans had completed training at the Los Angeles Institute and were entering jobs in the satellite and space exploration program at the new data acquisition facility which RCA Service Co. is operating under contract for the National Space and Aeronautics Administration at Fairbanks.
Twenty-five others were still in training at Los Angeles; 40 additional were scheduled to enroll and about 20 others were slated to begin training in February 1964.
The Supreme Court's action of 1963 affirmed the decision reached in the fall of 1962 by a special three-judge court established under a 1958 congressional law to adjudicate the Navajo-Hopi controversy.
At the center of the disagreement was a reservation set aside from the public domain by Executive order of the President in 1882 "for the use of the [Hopi] and such other Indians as the Secretary of the Interior may see fit to settle thereon."
The litigation revolved largely around the Navajo Tribe's contention that the major portion of this area is, in effect, part of the surrounding Navajo Reservation since many Navajo tribal members have been settled there over the years with the implied approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
As long as tribal ownership of the land remained in contention, economic development of its mineral and other potentialities was necessarily limited.
In its decision of September 28, 1962, the three-judge court ruled that the Hopi Tribe has exclusive interest in and to that part of the 1882 reservation lying within the boundaries of Land Management District No. 6 as defined in 1943.
The area thus awarded to the Hopi Tribe embraces about 500,000 acres and includes all the principal Hopi settlements.
It was conceded to be Hopi territory by the Navajo litigants.
As for the remaining part of the Executive order reservation, embracing about 2 million acres, the Court determined that both the Hopi and Navajo Tribes "have joint, undivided and equal interests" in and to this land and joint rights of use.
It will now be," the Court concluded, "for the two tribes and Government officials to determine whether, with these basic issues resolved, the area lying outside district 6 can and should be fairly administered as a joint reservation. If this proves impracticable or undesirable, any future effort to partition the jointly held area, by agreement, subsequently-authorized suit, or otherwise, will be aided by the determination in this action of the present legal rights and interests of the respective tribes."
Representatives of both tribes and of the Bureau of Indian Affairs were to meet at Phoenix, Ariz., in August 1963, to explore the problems involved in administration of the area as a “joint reservation.
Another noteworthy development took place in June 1963 when the Department complied with a request of the San Carlos Apaches and restored to tribal ownership the subsurface or mineral rights in an area of roughly 225,000 acres in eastern Arizona known as the "San Carlos Mineral Strip."
Indians.
Since 1932, however, the area has been withdrawn from all forms of public entry.
Recently interest has been shown in the copper and other mineral potential of the lands.
Restoration of the mineral interests to the tribe will open up the area for development and should be beneficial both to the Indians and to the State of Arizona.
Apart from these events, the Bureau of Indian Affairs in fiscal 1963 continued emphasizing greater development of human and natural resources on Indian reservations in line with policies recommended by the 1961 Task Force on Indian Affairs.
Work was pushed on construction projects that will add thousands of classroom seats to the BIA school system, especially on the Navajo Reservation and in Alaska.
Summer programs for students in BIA schools were expanded and increased attention was given to improving English-language teaching and other types of classroom instruction.
These new school buildings at Crownpoint, N. Mex., on the Navajo Reservation, comprise one of 38 projects in school construction completed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs in fiscal year 1963 to provide more classroom and dormitory space for the steadily increasing Indian population.
Work was completed on two major roads spanning the Navajo Reservation and linking it up with other principal highways of the Southwest.
Projects launched under the Accelerated Public Works Program on nearly 100 reservations provided useful work for thousands of tribal members and contributed importantly to the protection and development of Indian timber stands and other physical resources.
A new industrial plant, expected to provide jobs for some 200 workers, began operations during the spring on lands of the Laguna Pueblo in New Mexico and negotiations were underway seeking establishment of several additional plants that further will broaden employment opportunities for residents of other reservations.
When school construction funds are added to those for operation and maintenance of BIA's farflung school system, it becomes apparent that nearly 60 percent of the Bureau's total appropriations in any recent fiscal year has been for purposes directly related to education.
Improved education is essential for accomplishing the more comprehensive BIA goals of maximum Indian economic selfsufficiency, full participation of Indians in American life, and equal citizenship privileges and responsibilities for Indians.
One of the principal educational objectives of the Bureau is to provide a physical plant—embracing classrooms, dormitories, and all related facilities—that will include sufficient space to accommodate, without overcrowding, all Indian children who cannot feasibly be educated in non-Bureau schools.
A second and closely related purpose is to replace structures that have become obsolete or hazardous to health with modern, safe, and sanitary facilities.
The Bureau entered the 1960's with a substantial backlog of needs for expanding and modernizing buildings in its far-reaching school network.
These needs were particularly acute on the Navajo Reservation of Arizona and New Mexico and in the native villages of Alaska, but were by no means confined to those localities.
Complicating the problem still further was the fact of year-by-year increases in school-age populations to be accommodated in Federal facilities.
In fiscal 1963 the Bureau completed 38 school construction projects involving over 5,000 classroom seats.
About half these seats were additions to the total capacity of the BIA-operated school system; the others were included in replacements of previously inadequate structures.
The completed work will accommodate more pupils and will relieve serious overcrowding in many localities.
At year's end, 38 additional projects were underway.
When finished, they will provide about 9,700 classroom seats.
Of these, nearly 6,000 seats will be additions to the BIA-operated system and approximately 3,700 will be replacements.
On October 1, 1962, the Bureau began operating a new Institute of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, N. Mex.
Unique in the Bureau's school system, the Institute is being established on the grounds of the Bureau's former Santa Fe boarding school and was operated on a limited basis during its first year because the boarding school continued in partial operation.
Plans call for an eventual enrollment of about 500 students in the Institute; in fiscal 1963 the student body included 150 enrollees from 74 tribes in 20 States.
Courses were offered at the senior high school level and in two postgraduate years.
The curriculum included a fully accredited academic program with special emphasis on the vocational implications of fine and applied arts.
The postgraduate students concentrated on a major and minor field in the arts and were required to enroll in at least two academic courses related to their art studies.
Specialized instruction and guidance were provided in painting, sculpture, jewelry craftsmanship, ceramics, design and printing of textiles, and creative writing.
Advanced academic courses were available, at the student's expense, at a nearby college.
Results of the Institute's first year of operation were highly encouraging.
Students gain practical experience in applied art at a technical institute at Santa Fe, N. Mex., opened by the Bureau of Indian Affairs in the fall of 1962, which offers a basic high school curriculum plus 2 years of postgraduate work emphasizing the vocational aspects of fine and applied arts.
Several young people who had shown little previous interest in education responded enthusiastically to the unique opportunities offered at the Institute and there were comparatively few·dropouts.
A large percentage of the first-year students is expected to return in the fall of 1963 and the enrollment is being planned for not more than 300.
Further expansion of facilities will be required before the full complement of about 500 students can be accommodated.
In the summer of 1962 the Bureau continued for the third year its offering of special programs designed to broaden the horizons of Indian students and contribute to their personal development.
As in previous years, the summer programs were of four principal kinds: academic, student employment, organized sports and other leisure-time activities, and field trips.
With the growing popularity of these programs, about 12,800 students took part in 1962; this was an increase of about 90 percent over 1961.
Preschool sessions for beginners were a feature of the academic phase.
Youngsters entering school for the first time in the fall of 1962 were taken into some schools for periods up to 6 weeks.
During these sessions the teachers concentrated on widening the conceptual background of these children and on teaching English.
Several branches of the Bureau concerned with the conservation and development of resources such as soils and timber have cooperated with the Branch of Education at numerous locations across the country to provide summer employment for Indian youth.
The work of the students has contributed to the advancement of the resource programs and also has given the participants a greater measure of self-respect and pride in being able to earn money.
These work opportunities also helped encourage many students to remain in school.
The recreational phase of the programs is aimed at teaching students how to use their leisure time constructively and thus develop a sense of the responsibilities of good citizenship.
Activities included Scouting, 4-H Club work, arts and crafts, Little League baseball, softball, playground games, camping, swimming, golf, tennis, volleyball, archery, badminton, and bowling.
All helped fill the summertime void for students by developing a heightened sense of fairplay and sportsmanship, fostering social adjustment in group activities, and broadening the scope of associations with non-Indians.
These attitudes may well carry over into other facets of the students' lives.
Field trips were also important.
Many Indian children from reservation homes have had little or no experience outside the immediate periphery of their reservations and this deficiency is frequently reflected in the classroom achievement of the students at certain academic levels.
Educational field trips helped broaden the students' horizons.
The youngsters visited our larger cities, used shopping centers, and stayed in hotels and motels.
In addition, they were guided to scenic and educational points of interest.
They thus acquired the kind of enriching experiences most non-Indian youngsters consider commonplace.
These experiences, in turn, had classroom value since they gave a new dimension of meanings to many topics discussed in their studies.
Because more than 80 percent of the students enrolled in BIA schools come from homes where an Indian language is spoken regularly, development of facility in speaking and understanding English is one of the most important primary tasks of the Bureau's school system.
In May 1963 the Bureau concentrated attention on this task at a Washington conference of some of the country's outstanding experts on the Indian languages and their relationship to English.
Consultants included Dr. George Sanchez of the University of Texas, Dr. Edward Kennard of the University of Pittsburgh, Dr. Edward Dozier of the University of Arizona, John Connelly of San Francisco State College, and Robert Young, tribal operations officer at the Bureau's Gallup (N. Mex.) area office.
In a 4-day meeting with the Commissioner and his top education staff, past and present programs of English-language instruction in Bureau schools were appraised and recommendations for improvements were formulated.
As a result of the conference, arrangements were made for developing a series of tape-recorded training lessons for orienting school personnel who work with Navajo-speaking pupils.
A second series of tapes is to be used in connection with other southwestern tribes.
The conferees also recommended better pretraining and more thorough orientation of BIA teachers in the cultural and language backgrounds of the people they are going to teach, employing linguists to develop materials for use in language laboratories and to select vocabularies that will facilitate language learning at various grade levels, and revision of the "Minimum Essential Goals" document used in all BIA schools to reflect more accurately the Bureau's current philosophy of English language teaching.
In common with public schools all over the country, the Bureau faces a serious problem in the large number of students who drop out of school before completing the 12 years considered a minimum prerequisite for adequate employment.
Considerable evidence suggests that the dropout rate in Bureau schools is substantially higher than the national public school average.
To find better ways of coping with this problem, the Bureau opened a demonstration school in the fall of 1962 in two renovated cottage-type dormitories at Concho, Okla.
The student body consisted of 78 youngsters who either had dropped out of school or had shown a pronounced inclination to do so.
The staff consisted of highly qualified personnel whose assignment was to diagnose the individual difficulties of each student and help him overcome his education indifference and personal problems.
When a pupil reached the proper stage in terms of motivation and academic preparedness, he was transferred either to his former school or to another school believed to be better equipped to meet his individual needs.
At the close of the school year, 27 of the 78 enrollees were still in attendance at Concho, 32 were still in attendance at other schools to which they had been transferred during the year, and 12 were no longer in school.
This represented a salvage rate of 85 percent.
While the results were encouraging, efforts to curb dropouts will be increased.
For the 1963–64 term, a psychologist will be added to the Concho staff to study causes of educational indifference and special services will be provided by a supervisor trained in psychiatric social work.
To keep pace with changes in the employment market caused by rapid advances in automation, the Bureau took additional steps in fiscal 1963 to make its high school programs less “terminal" and more preparatory for postgraduate technical or vocational training or for college enrollment.
At the Haskell Institute in Lawrence, Kans., the ninth grade was eliminated to provide additional space for students seeking post-high-school training in electronics, the building trades, the service occupations, or business and commercial subjects.
At the Institute of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, 2 years beyond high school were offered to provide training in arts-related occupations.
And at the Chilocco School in Oklahoma, post-high-school courses were offered in some of the distributive and service occupations.
Like other schools throughout the country, those operated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs are now giving heightened emphasis to science courses.
These Navajo students at the Intermountain School in Utah are learning the differences between the mythology of the rain dance and the meteorology of air masses.
Agency), Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin, because these are States where full responsibility for educating resident Indian children has been taken over by the public school system.
In other States where the BIA operates, the enrollment of school-age Indian children in all schools increased 3.1 percent in fiscal 1963.
Of the 121,236 enrolled, 7.7 percent were in mission and other private schools.
Public school enrollment increased by 2,508 students.
The Bureau in fiscal 1963 operated 264 schools with an enrollment of 43,435 including those under 6 and over 18 years of age.
This was an increase of 1,390 students, or 3 percent, as compared with fiscal 1962.
In addition, dormitory facilities were provided at 20 locations for 4,082 Indian students attending public schools.
Dormitory operations of this type meet unusual emergencies and do not represent a permanent pattern for educating Indians.
Apart from the regular school program, the Bureau continued offering classes on the reservations for adult residents to increase their understanding of the work around them and to upgrade their skills for earning a living.
With unemployment on Indian reservations across the country averaging about 40 percent and running as high as 50 or 60 percent in some areas, it was clear that upgrading of Indian skills and the creation of more local job opportunities are tasks of the highest priority for the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
In recent years the Bureau has given increased attention to this problem.
In fiscal 1963 the attack was broader than ever with five distinct operations of the Bureau contributing directly to alleviating Indian unemployment.
These were adult vocational training, voluntary relocation of Indians for employment in urban centers, industrial development on or near the reservations, the accelerated public works projects on the reservations, and increased use of “force account" by the Bureau in its construction. In addition, the Bureau continued emphasizing greater economic development and wider employment opportunities through its "resource" programs in the fields of forestry, range management, irrigation, soil and moisture conservation, and mineral development.
Fiscal 1963 was a peak year for vocational training of Indians.
This was 549 more than the 1962 total, or an increase of more than 20 percent.
Of the 1963 trainees, 1,164 were carried over from the previous year and 1,747 entered training.
When family dependents are included, 5,047 persons benefited from the 1963 operation.
In addition, 675 Indians took part in 19 training programs of the Area Redevelopment Administration in Indian communities of 5 States, and an undetermined number of others participated in ARA training programs in non-Indian communities.
Eighteen different occupations were involved in the 19 ARA Indian-community projects.
An outstanding example of cooperation between BIA and ARA was the movement of 35 Indians from Arizona and New Mexico reservations to Los Angeles, where they completed a basic electronics course and then moved directly into jobs.
Relocation of Indians for direct employment in urban centers (as distinguished from relocation for purposes of vocational training) declined slightly in fiscal 1963.
1,866 for 1962; the total number of individuals involved was 3,318, compared with 3,494.
The decrease reflected BIA's greater emphasis on vocational training as preparation for the steadier and better paying types of employment.
Apart from the relocation to urban centers, the Bureau helped an additional 2,052 family heads or unattached individuals find jobs, temporary or permanent, on or near reservations.
Many had qualified for this employment through on-job training in industrial plants recently established in reservation areas.
Availability of increasing numbers of Indians with job skills has made it possible to assist more and more Indians to obtain adequate employment near the reservations and in urban centers.
Employers representing many fields are becoming favorably aware of the productive ability of Indian workers, both men and women.
By the late spring of 1963, reports to the Bureau indicated that more than 500 Indians were working in industrial plants established over the past several years on or near Indian reservations.
Through its industrial development program, the Bureau encourages this trend by working closely with tribal organizations and maintaining liaison with industrial concerns interested in new plant locations.
In cases where the companies have programs for training workers on the job, the Bureau is in position to compensate them, under terms of a formal contract, for the cost of training Indian workers.
The most noteworthy new plant to begin operations in Indian country during fiscal 1963 was an electronics establishment on lands of the Laguna Pueblo west of Albuquerque, N. Mex.
The tribal group agreed to construct a $440,000 building to house the operation and to lease it to the company.
The BIA helped the arrangement in a liaison capacity and provided financial assistance through an on-the-job training contract.
The plant is expected to provide jobs eventually for 200 or more Indian workers.
Arrangements were also completed in fiscal 1963 for a plant to manufacture hair curlers and similar cosmetic aids on the Cherokee Reservation in North Carolina.
This will be the third industrial plant for that reservation.
It is expected to employ about 200 at full operation.
Under an agreement between the company and the tribe, the tribe will construct a $250,000 building to house the operation and make building and equipment available to the company under a 25-year lease.
The Bureau has agreed to help through an on-the-job training contract.
By the end of March 1963 the Bureau had on-the-job training contracts with 13 industrial concerns and was financing the training of 245 Indians in their plants.
Under the Accelerated Public Works program, more than $12 million was allotted the Bureau of Indian Affairs in fiscal 1963.
These funds permitted the Bureau to move immediately on a backlog of urgently needed public works on Indian reservations impossible to reach with regular appropriations.
Eighty-six APW projects began on Indian reservations in 18 States during the year, providing over 17,000 man-months of employment for Indians.
Preference was given jobs with comparatively low costs for equipment and supplies so funds would create greatest employment.
By year's end, over 5,500 Indians were working on these projects.
The APW projects on Indian reservations had four principal objectives: upgrading Indian-owned timber stands, conserving of soil and water, improving reservation roads, and constructing community centers.
The forestry projects were carried out under principles of sustained yield and well-balanced multiple use.
They involved the thinning of overcrowded young stands to promote the growth of selected trees, pruning to produce knot-free timber of greater value, cleanup of roadsides to improve scenic values and reduce fire hazards, construction of firebreaks, and provision of campgrounds and picnic facilities.
Soil and water conservation projects were designed for local needs and conditions.
One type involved the fencing of Indian rangelands to promote better use of the resource.
Others were concentrated on brush eradication and range reseeding.
In addition to controlling erosion, these practices will increase forage production as much as 15 to 20 times by eliminating low-grade plants that compete with the grass.
Another type of conservation project, carried out on many reservations, involved the construction of small dams to control floods and store water for livestock or recreational use.
Road projects under the APW program ranged from improvement work on forest protection trails to complete construction and surfacing of roads serving reservations.
Such work was accomplished on 88 roads totaling 651 miles on 38 reservations.
Funds available for accelerated public works on Indian reservations have brought urgently needed improvements in the resource base of many tribes and urgently needed jobs for many tribal members.
Thinning and pruning of young stands of timber was an important phase of the work.
Nine such constructions were undertaken in Alaska and 14 on Indian reservations in the other States.
All but three were completed by year's end.
There are two principal ways in which the Bureau can accomplish needed work in road maintenance and construction, repair and maintenance of buildings, and construction of buildings and utilities.
One is by awarding a private contract; the other is through the use of “force account" which involves direct employment by the BIA and BIA supervision of the job.
Experience has shown that the force account method generally creates more employment opportunities for Indians and provides them with valuable construction training.
The force account method shall be used when justified by the employment and training of Indian workers, and where the acquisition of equipment can be justified.
The contract method shall be used on projects where Indian workers are not available, or where the acquisition of specialized equipment cannot be justified.
In line with this policy, the Bureau has for the past 2 years used force account, wherever practicable, in its construction and has staffed its crews to the fullest possible extent with Indians.
At the end of fiscal 1962, there were 2,847 workers employed on force account projects throughout the Bureau, compared with 1,260 in fiscal 1961.
Of the 987 additional force account workers in 1962, an estimated 776, or nearly 80 percent, were Indians.
During fiscal 1963, the Bureau continued emphasizing force account and was employing over 1,000 more workers on such projects at the end of the period than at the beginning.
It is estimated that 90 percent of the additional jobs created were occupied by Indians.
Apart from the direct employment expansion activities described earlier, the Bureau also accelerated its longer range efforts to create a more dynamic climate of economic activity on Índian reservations.
In this connection, economic feasibility studies, road construction, and the financing of Indian economic enterprises were especially important.
Twenty-six new studies were undertaken in fiscal 1963 to explore the feasibility of various types of economic enterprises on Indian reservations.
These were in addition to the 19 such studies launched the previous year and continued in fiscal 1963.
Two of the new studies were financed by the Area Redevelopment Administration and the balance by the BIA.
Indian tribes are showing an increased awareness of the possibilities for developing revenue-producing and job-creating tourist attractions on their reservations.
Pyramid Lake in Nevada is one of many Indian areas which have a high potential for such development.
A large number of the studies were focused on the possibilities of developing tourist attractions to create additional jobs for reservation Indians and bring more revenue into tribal treasuries.
The more important Indian areas being surveyed for such potentialities included the Pyramid Lake Reservation in Nevada, the Warm Springs Reservation in Oregon, the Allegany (Seneca) Reservation in New York State, the Big Bend Redevelopment Area embracing the Crow Creek and Lower Brule Reservations in South Dakota, the Hopi Reservation in Arizona, the Nez Perce Reservation in Idaho, and the right-of-way along the newly completed Routes 1 and 3 on the Navajo Reservation in Arizona and New Mexico.
Other major types of studies focused on the possibilities of food processing (on the Quinault Reservation in Washington and the Kotzebue area of Alaska) and on the commercial utilization of forest products (on the Blackfeet and Rocky Boys Reservations in Montana, the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming, and the Navajo Reservation of the Southwest).
Over the past 30 years the BIA road system has been gradually expanding and evolving into a complex transportation network on reservations in 22 States.
In fiscal 1963 the system was substantially improved by construction of more miles of road than in any previous year.
Roadway grading was accomplished on 475 miles of road, compared with 383 miles in 1962; all-weather surfacing was completed on 575 miles, as contrasted with 543 in the preceding period.
Emphasis was on two principal objectives: the improvement of schoolbus routes and the construction of roads serving existing or potential business enterprises and tourist attractions.
By the close of fiscal 1963, all the more important work was finished on the biggest road construction job ever undertaken by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
This involved the building of two prime highways, designated as Routes 1 and 3, across the Navajo and Hopi Reservations, which have a combined area roughly the size of West Virginia.
A $20 million contract authorization for the two roads was provided by Congress in August 1958 and contracts totaling $2 million were awarded during the balance of the fiscal year that ended June 30, 1959.
The program was completed with successive annual programs of $4 million to $5 million in the following fiscal years.
All that remained to be accomplished at the end of fiscal 1963 was the widening of bituminous-surfaced sections.
This work was expected to be under contract during the 1963 construction season.
The two roads come together at Tuba City, Ariz., on the western side of the Navajo Reservation.
From there, Route 3 runs for 168 miles in a general easterly direction across the Hopi Reservation through Ganado, Ariz., to a point on U.S. Route 666 north of Gallup, N. Mex.
Route 1 is roughly 200 miles long and proceeds in a northeasterly direction across the northwest corner of the joint Navajo-Hopi reservation through Kayenta and Mexican Water, Ariz., to a point on U.S. Route 666 south of Shiprock, N. Mex.
Prior to construction of Routes 1 and 3, State highways did not enter the Navajo-Hopi area or cross its interior.
The interior was inadequately served by a system of BIA routes ranging from trails, at the worst, to unsurfaced roads, at the best.
The prime significance of the new construction is that it opens up this vast area—with its rich scenic values and its great potentialities for economic development—to traffic moving along major highways from almost every part of the country.
Both the Navajo and Hopi Tribes, as well as the U.S. public at large, should benefit greatly.
In terms of tourism, the potentialities are extremely far reaching.
The Navajo-Hopi area contains many points of interest to tourists and should benefit from the growing tourist traffic now being drawn to the southwestern United States as the existence of the two all-weather routes becomes more widely known.
This, in turn, will lead to a mounting demand for motels and other overnight accommodations, restaurants, camping facilities, riding and hiking trails, and guided tours of the reservation area—and to greatly increased job opportunities for Navajo and Hopi Indians.
As noted earlier, a study was started in fiscal 1963 to determine the most desirable pattern of tourist-accommodation development along these two routes.
It should provide the key to the types and specific locations of facilities that will prove most financially rewarding.
In addition, Routes 1 and 3 should enhance industrial development in the Navajo-Hopi area.
As constructed, the two roads can handle large volumes of industrial traffic.
The two reservations, taken together, have a large pool of available manpower which should become increasingly skilled as vocational training opportunities provided to Indians by the BIA and other Federal agencies are continued and expanded.
Completion of Routes 1 and 3 was unquestionably a major milestone in the centuries-old history of the Navajo and Hopi Indian Tribes; it should mark the beginning of an era of unprecedented economic growth and development in this long-neglected portion of the American Southwest.
To finance a wide variety of economic enterprises on Indian reservations, ranging from individually owned livestock herds to tribally owned sawmills and motels, the Indians need credit.
For several years past, the most important source has been the banks and other lending institutions serving the general public.
Indians, however, have been at some disadvantage in dealing with these lenders because of the trust and restricted status of Indian land titles and the custodial role of the Government in Indian affairs.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs has a credit program; one of the chief functions is to facilitate transactions and assist Indian tribes or individual Indians obtain loans from these institutions.
Success of the efforts is indicated by the fact that the financing of Indian enterprises from such sources has nearly quadrupled over the past decade, rising from $22 million in calendar year 1952 to $85 million in 1962.
A second source of Indian financing is tribal funds.
Nearly $26 million of such money was being used in tribal credit programs at the close of fiscal 1962, the latest date for which comprehensive information is available.
Prospects are that this source of financing will be substantially enlarged in the future in many areas as judgments are awarded by the Indian Claims Commission in compensation for tribal claims against the United States.
The revolving credit program of the BIA provides financing to Indian tribes and individual Indians in cases where loans from other sources cannot be obtained or are insufficient to meet needs.
A total of $27 million has been authorized by Congress for the BIA credit program.
Of this, about $23.7 million has been appropriated.
Because of the revolving nature of the fund, however, loans totaling more than $48 million have been made over the history of the program since the 1930's.
Of this $30.5 million has been repaid and $236,000 has been canceled.
Over the years prior to 1961, the average amount of new advances made from the fund per year was about $1.5 million; by contrast, the total for fiscal 1963 was nearly four times as great, or roughly $5.8 million.
Of this, about $2 million was advanced to tribal organizations for relending to individual members; about $3.5 million was for financing of tribally owned enterprises, such as sawmills, livestock herds, pasture improvements, and the operation of salmon canneries in Alaska; and $350,000 was for attracting industries to establish plants on or near the reservations.
In addition to projects made possible on Indian reservations by allotment of Accelerated Public Works funds, much valuable work in resource conservation and development was accomplished during the year by the Bureau with its regular appropriations.
In the early 1950's, the Bureau started a systematic program of soil surveys on Indian reservation lands to meet mounting demands for such information in connection with farm, range, and watershed planning.
In 1957 this program was expanded to include data on forage and water resources and recreational potentials of the range as well as the soils information.
Since then, both range and soil surveys have progressed simultaneously.
Because the surveys are made on a crop-year basis, data for 1963 are incomplete.
Indications are that soil work will be completed in fiscal 1963 on some 5 million acres and range surveys on more than 6 million acres.
During the past 10 years, up-to-date inventories have been completed on all the commercially important Indian forests to provide a basis for calculating the allowable annual cut under a program of sustained yield management.
On most forested reservations, the new data indicate that the annual harvest can safely be increased by 50 percent or more as compared with the level of cutting that has prevailed in recent years.
On such reservations, the volume of timber harvesting will be stepped up as rapidly as funds become available to administer additional sales and as markets for the additional timber can be developed.
In fiscal 1963, cash returns from Indian timber sales increased 8 percent over 1962 and totaled over $9 million for 591 million board feet.
This was accomplished despite a distressed condition in the lumber market.
Indian timber sales were sufficient to build about 60,000 five-room houses.
Additionally, the 1963 harvest of Indian timber generated about 5,000 man-years of direct employment and probably 2,000 manyears of indirect employment in service occupations as a result of the increased payrolls.
About 1,500 man-years of this work was accomplished by the Indians.
One of the major objectives of the Bureau's resource management programs is to give Indians, and particularly Indian youth, a better understanding of the lands and other physical resources held in trust for them by the United States and to instruct them in the proper care of these assets.
One example of this is the land judging school which has become an annual event on the Cherokee Reservation in North Carolina.
As many as 12 teams from high schools in 5 counties of western North Carolina participate in these yearly contests, held under BIA auspices.
Another method of improving Indians' understanding of the use and management of their resources is through conservation youth camps, part of the summer programs mentioned earlier.
Thus, at the Fort Defiance Subagency on the Navajo Reservation in Arizona, four such encampments were organized in fiscal 1963 and probably will be continued in future years.
The goal of the camps is to help the boys and girls learn about soil and range conservation from qualified technicians while they perform valuable work on the land.
Efforts are also being made to promote fuller Indian appreciation of the potentialities of their reservation resources for recreational development and use by tourists.
Through meetings organized by the Bureau and explanations provided by BIA specialists, Indians on many reservations are becoming enthusiastic about these possibilities and have begun planning for recreational development.
In several instances, advice and help are being sought from other agencies of Government with special expertise in the recreational field.
In the calendar year 1962, more than 837,000 acres were farmed on Indian irrigation projects.
They produced crops valued at $67.3 million.
Work advanced in rehabilitating facilities and extending them to new lands.
Through youth conservation camps organized by BlA, young Indians are being given a better understanding of the lands and other resources on reservations that comprise their most precious heritage.
Studies were completed on the Fort Peck and Flathead Projects in Montana and the Wapato Project in Washington.
Another noteworthy development was the work being done at several localities to convert reservoirs built originally as capital investments for Indian irrigation projects into important recreational assets.
An example was the Wild Horse Reservoir adjoining the Western Shoshone Reservation in Nevada.
After completion of construction, the manmade lake was stocked with fish and this has created a demand for camping and picnicking facilities along the shoreline which has already become more economically significant than the original irrigation purpose of the reservoir.
Potentialities for similar development at other Indian irrigation projects are being actively explored.
Although income from leasing of Indian lands for oil and gas and other mineral development declined in fiscal 1963, it was more than offset by a gain of roughly 30 percent in income from grants of surface uses, both leases and rights-of-way.
Such income totaled $13.1 million compared with $10.1 million in fiscal 1962.
The gain was largely attributable to greater awareness of rental values resulting from the Bureau's expanding real estate appraisal activity.
A coal mining lease covering nearly 8,800 acres on the Navajo Reservation in New Mexico was approved.
The lease resulted under an exclusive exploration permit approved in March 1959.
It still contains an option for leasing an additional 13,880 acres.
Under the lease, the coal mined is to be used for fuel in a proposed gasification plant to be constructed on the Navajo Reservation.
An exclusive 2-year permit to prospect for minerals other than oil and gas covering 19,200 acres of tribal land on the Gila River Indian Community, Arizona, which grants an option to lease, was approved.
This marks the first effort in mineral exploration by modern methods on this reservation.
Another "first" was an oil and gas lease sale held on the Northern Cheyenne Reservation, Mont.
Bonus offerings totaled $177,327.
Indian irrigation projects in 1962 produced crops valued at $67.3 million.
Studies are now underway to provide a factual basis for appraising the present economic strength and potential future benefits of these projects.
In the summer of 1962 a three-man task force appointed by Secretary Udall visited the native areas of Alaska to study the effectiveness of local programs of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Here two task force members confer with Eskimo villagers at Point Hope who have been skinning walrus.
In 1961, the Secretary of the Interior appointed a special task force to study Indian affairs throughout the Nation.
Because of an extremely crowded schedule, the group was unable to visit Alaska.
In its report, however, it commented briefly on Alaskan programs of BIA and emphasized the need for a separate study of these activities.
As a result, Secretary Udall scheduled a special Alaskan study to begin during June 1962.
Serving on the task force, which traveled more than 5,000 miles throughout Alaska, were W.
W.
Keeler, principal chief of the Cherokee Indian Nation, chairman; Hugh J. Wade, Secretary of State for Alaska; and James E. Officer, Associate Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
They submitted their report to the Secretary in December 1962, and some of their suggestions have already been carried out.
Groundwork for fulfillment of others was laid in fiscal 1963.
Recommendations of the task force cover education, the serious native land problem, the BIA loan program which has made it possible for the Indians of southeast Alaska to operate village salmon canneries, the Eskimo reindeer herding program, and hunting and fishing matters which are of vital concern to the native population.
Native children in Alaska lag behind the general population in educational attainment because of lack of schools and because of a deficiency in the English language.
To combat this situation, the task force recommended that the Bureau's Branch of Education intensify its collaboration with the State of Alaska to develop an adequate educational system that will include Indian and native children throughout Alaska.
Task force recommendations in keeping with this goal include providing better educational services in the native villages, expanding the regional high school program, and providing greater vocational training and placement opportunities to the natives.
In realizing these suggestions, the Bureau has continued to expand elementary and high schools in the native villages where it has responsibility.
The 1963 fiscal year budget provided $4,511,- 000 for the planning, construction, and major improvement of new and expanded elementary school buildings and utilities.
Funds were appropriated for building of high schools at Unalakleet, Barrow, and Kotzebue.
In addition, a teacher-directed correspondence program was made available by the Bureau to high-school-age students and adult natives in isolated areas.
Hot-lunch programs were started in all Bureau schools, and the boarding school program continued to operate on an expanding basis throughout the year.
Other accomplishments included the addition of the ninthgrade level at Wrangel Institute and the provision of 150 additional spaces for Alaskan youths of high school age.
The spaces were provided at Chemawa Indian School in Oregon.
Vocational assistance, scholarship aid to qualified college-age students, and provision of additional opportunities for commercial and vocational training for Alaskan natives at the Haskell Institute also were realized throughout fiscal 1963.
The Bureau likewise intensified its adult education program in the villages.
The extent of BIA participation in education is characterized by the fact that during fiscal 1963, the Bureau financed and operated 83 schools in Alaska, completely subsidized 21 others (under Johnson-O'Malley funds), and provided financial help to 5 others.
Total cost of the program was over $7 million.
The most widespread forms of livelihood for the Alaskan natives, especially the Eskimos and Athapascans, are fishing and hunting.
While these subsistence activities have been improved upon by modern technology, many problems remain.
The task force devoted much of its 110-page report to the controversy over enforcement of the Migratory Bird Treaty of 1916 which forbids hunting of certain types of migratory fowl in Alaska when fresh meat is in short supply.
The task force recommended a thorough study by the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service to determine possible relief to Indians in this matter.
In addition, task force recommendations started special studies of hunting and fishing license programs in Alaska.
These concerned activities of big-game hunters in the sport killing of polar bears from low-flying planes, the hunting and conservation of walrus, and bag limits on migratory birds.
In response to these studies, Alaskan and BIA officials in 1963 directed their employees to provide outlying villages with qualified agents to issue token subsistence licenses, provided for by the Alaska State Legislature in a law of March 14, 1963.
State and BIA cooperation fulfilled another Task Force recommendation—assuring native representation cn the Alaskan State Board of Fish and Game and on local district advisory boards.
At the end of fiscal 1963, 4 of the 10 State board members were Alaska natives.
Contrasted to the economic development programs for the Indians of the lower 48 States, the program in Alaska in tribal enterprise was rather limited.
This is true regarding reindeer herding, arts and crafts, canneries, tanning, and mining.
The oldest economic development activity for Alaskan natives and one with many vagaries is the maintenance and care of reindeer herds.
This activity is suffering from a conflict of the natives' time and interests.
A BIA official in Alaska reports that many Indians leave their herds at a crucial time in the season to go hunting and fishing.
Other problems impeding the natives' economic progress in the reindeer industry result because they have been relatively unacquainted with herding practices and because markets for reindeer meat are scarce.
Bureau and task force studies have recommended programs to improve reindeer management and marketing.
Similar to reindeer herding problems are arts and crafts.
The task force report indicated that arts and crafts had not flourished partly because the natives feel prices do not compensate them adequately for time spent in manufacturing curios.
The Arts and Crafts Board of the Department, established to further such activities among Indians and Alaskan natives, has had a representative in Alaska since 1952.
The supervisor is aided by several employees throughout the State's Indian regions.
Regarding industrial development, the task force cited the need for classifying the native communities (which are widely differentiated) in terms of their economic needs and development potential.
The force also felt that a "peace corps" program may be the only realistic approach to improving the economy of the Alaskan communities where isolation and lack of technology have limited development.
In its report, the task force emphasized that the land situation in Alaska has tended to hamper development among the Alaskan natives.
In the Alaskan Organic Act of 1884, Congress promised that the natives "shall not be disturbed in the possession of any lands actually in their use or occupation or now claimed by them," but reserved to itself a determination as to how title to these lands might be conveved.
As a result of the Alaskan Statehood Act of 1958, which authorized the State to select more than 100 million acres from the public domain, the question of native rights under the 1884 act has now become a main issue.
Some of the lands claimed by the natives have already been selected by the State.
The task force suggested several steps for resolving this controversy.
These include granting individual natives the title to home sites and hunting and fishing sites; withdrawing acreages in near native villages for their growth and development; establishing native hunting and fishing privileges in larger areas; and setting up a special tribunal for considering native claims for lands taken from them by others since 1884.
It also recommended that Congress prescribe a definite period in which to adjudicate native claims so the State land selection program will not be indeflnitely postponed.
All these recommendations were under consideration at the close of fiscal 1963.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs has operated a credit program in Alaska since 1936.
At the close of fiscal 1963, about 40 percent of the outstanding loans from the Bureau's revolving fund were concentrated in this area.
Alaska has long constituted the Bureau's chief credit problem area.
About 93 percent of the entire reserve of the Bureau for potential losses on loans is for loans made in this area.
The program falls into three principal categories.
In terms of amounts loaned, the largest is for the purchase, maintenance, and operation of salmon canneries at four communities in southeastern Alaska.
A fifth cannery is operated by a native association, but it is not financed by the Bureau.
The cannery program of the four communities generally has not been successful.
There are many reasons, but the shortage of fish is the main cause.
Operations in 1962 were again unsuccessful.
In addition to small packs, the price of canned salmon declined and pack sales were slow, increasing costs.
Under recommendations in the task force report, a private research organization is studying possible diversification and expansion opportunities.
This will help determine the feasibility of continuing operations.
To increase production, funds have been made available for the purchase or construction of nine additional large boats to fish for the canneries.
A tentative plan for consolidating the canneries has been developed, but activation will await a study still underway at year's end.
A conference at Juneau, attended by representatives of the village associations, attempted to develop closer working relationships between the Bureau and the village councils.
The second category involves loans to native organizations for relending to members.
About 78 percent of the amount in this category outstanding at the close of the year was to the organizations operating the canneries, which finance the fishing activities of their individual members.
Generally, the loans were not in good condition.
Arrangements were made to permit title to boats purchased with loans to be retained by the community associations, in accordance with the suggestion of the task force.
The third category involves loans to native organizations in remote areas of Alaska for operating stores and trading posts.
This program has been successful.
In harmony with recommendations of the task force, seven additional loans totaling $189,500 were approved during 1963 to enlarge this program.
This program has probably benefited more people with a comparatively small amount of money than any other loans made from the revolving fund.
Only about 13 percent of the outstanding loans at the close of the year were for this purpose, but they were benefiting a native population of over 9,000.
In contrast, loans to the four cannery villages represented about 80 percent of the unpaid loans, and were benefiting a population of less than 1,500.
In tribal operations, the Bureau's primary mission is to help Indians improve and stabilize their political structures and assist them in developing their tribal business capabilities.
These goals are more rapidly achieved when the tribes themselves furnish able leadership toward these ends.
Some 251 tribes, bands, or other identifiable groups of Indians and Alaska natives throughout the United States function with written organizational documents, and over 150 others are self-governing on a more informal basis.
Fiscal 1963 marked the awakening of tribes in many areas to their growing political and economic responsibilities.
The need for effective government and business management became more apparent as large sums of money were awarded to some tribes by the Indian Claims Commission.
The Bureau's efforts were directed toward overcoming historic suspicions regarding modern governmental procedures.
A particular target was Alaska, where Bureau specialists in tribal organization were assigned among the Indians and Eskimos for the first time.
Wainwright and Angoon were newly incorporated as fourth-class cities and nine other villages either incorporated under State town laws or set up credit associations.
Many others were reexamining their political structure with a view to make changes to meet modern situations.
Specific attention was devoted to updating tribal organizational documents among the numerous Indian groups of western Washington, where political development has been slight.
The Quinault Tribe, having the largest reservation in the area, drew up a constitution and bylaws which, when adopted, will permit advancement in both political activity and economic development.
Likewise, the Suquamish, the Skokomish, the Squaxon Islanders, and the Lummi moved toward more effective tribal organization.
Elsewhere in the Pacific Northwest, the Warm Springs, Coeur d’Alene, and other tribes began discussing the need for changes in their organic documents.
The Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska amended virtually its entire tribal document to enable it to cope with present responsibilities.
The Winnebagos of Wisconsin adopted a new constitution and bylaws.
Throughout the year, aid was provided the Executive Committee of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe in modernizing its organization.
The tribe's document limits the authority of the six tribal bands and fails to provide the representation they want.
An amended version has been approved and the tribe will vote to accept or reject it.
The amendment election poses a difficult problem since the Indian Reorganization Act requires that at least 30 percent of the eligible voters participate.
Over half of the population has moved from the reservation, increasing the possibility that a quorum may not participate in the constitutional election.
The Seminoles of Florida significantly amended their constitution and charter during the year.
The tribe's organization is now unique, separating political functions from business management.
Several other tribes are studying this arrangement for possible use.
The Crow Creek and Lower Brule Sioux made organizational changes to meet the increased responsibilities created by the Big Bend Dam and Reservoir project.
Simplified articles of association for the Las Vegas Colony and Summit Lake Reservation (Nevada) and the Santa Rosa Rancheria (California) were developed to meet the needs of these comparatively small groups without overburdening them with complicated and expensive political machinery.
The Bureau is trying to interest other small tribes in streamlining their organizations.
Assisting tribes in the effective control and use of their funds has long been a major program of the Bureau.
In seeking to improve tribal management, the Bureau in fiscal 1963 helped in developing a $4 million rehabilitation program for the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe (South Dakota) ; a $2 million program for the Lower Brule Tribe (South Dakota) ; a $10 million program for the Crow Tribe (Montana); and smaller programs for the Nez Perce (Idaho), Ute Mountain (Colorado), Navajo (Arizona, New Mexico, Utah), Yakima (Washington), and other tribes.
Administrative plans, tribal enterprises, housing authorities, and many other organizational devices were used to implement and improve tribal business operations.
In fiscal 1963, approximately $67 million in tribal funds from annual income and from judgment awards was employed for many purposes.
About $50 million went for special tribal programs, community development, economic development, and capital investment; and $17 million went to tribal members in the form of dividends, family plans, and outright per capita payments.
Indian leadership has shown increasing interest in developing administrative proficiency and in economic programs upon which stronger and more durable communities can be built.
This is evident in their willingness to commit millions of dollars to special projects.
The present situation contrasts with the strong view of a few years ago that unrestricted per capita payments to individual members represented the only acceptable use of tribal capital.
Many Indian leaders now advocate programing for development and for income-producing ventures first, and dividend payments second.
In 1946, Congress created the Indian Claims Commission to hear and determine claims of tribes, bands, and other identifiable groups of Indians in the United States.
More than 850 claims were filed; 138 have been dismissed.
Seventy-three claims have so far brought 43 awards totaling $95.9 million.
These awards have been made primarily as additional payment for the taking of 143 million acres of land.)
Six hundred and forty claims remain to be adjudicated and are in various stages of prosecution.
During fiscal 1963, Congress appropriated $7,315,000 to the Pawnee Tribe; $4,647,000 to the Miami Tribe of Indiana and Oklahoma; $3 million to the Kalispel Tribe; $97,025 to the Tillamook Band; and $72,162 tothe Nehalem Band of Tillamook Indians.
Besides this total of $15,132,000 which was appropriated, awards were made for an additional $10,100,000 involving cases either on appeal to the Court of Claims or for which Congress had not yet appropriated funds.
Undoubtedly the remaining 640 claims, if they are successfully adjudicated, will provide financial opportunities unparalleled in tribal history.
Liability has been established in some 60 instances and the prospect of 15 to 20 new awards each year is indicated.
Many of the tribes have claims for the taking of large tracts, but are not able to finance the cost of appraisers to set a value for the land.
The 466 million acres of public lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management are among our Nation's most valuable natural resources.
On the public lands are some of the most productive forests, and under the public lands lies much of the mineral wealth necessary for our modern economy.
The public rangelands provide forage for thousands of cattle and sheep, and for another national treasure—our native wildlife.
The public lands contain developed recreation values and even greater potential for all citizens to enjoy through hunting, fishing, camping, or simply being outdoors.
Through its program of multiple-use management of the public lands, the Bureau of Land Management seeks to balance all beneficial uses for the public domain.
The BLM works constantly to protect resources from natural and manmade hazards such as fire and erosion.
BLM engineering programs help make multiple-use management and protection possible.
This report presents BLM's accomplishments in fiscal 1963 in all these areas of its activity.
It also outlines many of the Bureau's plans to continue to improve the public lands and their management.
The national responsibility of the Bureau of Land Management was clearly stated by President Kennedy in his special message on natural resources of February 23, 1961: "We cannot, however, delude ourselves—we must understand our resources problems, and we must face up to them now. The task is large but it will be done."
Effective management of the public lands depends in part upon efficient processing of applications filed by the public for public land.
In the past, difficulties in prompt handling of applications led to delays in needed disposals, complications of management problems, and large expenditures for "paper processing."
Full correction of this situation requires legislation, as well as administrative departures.
A major administrative step in this direction was the adoption of a complete revision, effective June 14, 1963, of part 296 of title 43 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
The changes are expected to expedite the handling of applications for public lands by BLM in cases where land classifications or similar determinations are involved.
The new regulations specify the land laws under which classification and other action to open lands to disposal are necessary.
They also specify the general criteria to be used by the Department in making the classification decision.
They further streamline procedures by moving the review of classification actions from appellate channels to administrative channels.
Another significant simplification of public land procedures was restriction of small-tract applications to areas opened to such application.
Much attention was devoted to updating regulations.
Twentyfive proposed changes in regulations were being developed or had already been submitted for departmental approval at year's end.
Most were designed to bring regulation language clearly into line with departmental decisions, so people doing business with the Government would be given a clear impression of the current rules and what they mean.
To further the program of modern management of the public lands on a multiple-use basis, several legislative proposals were introduced in the 88th Congress.
Two important public land-management laws were enacted by the 87th Congress.
They are the Mining Claims Occupancy Act of October 23, 1962 (Public Law 87–851), and the Petrified Wood Act of September 28, 1962 (Public Law 87–713).
The Mining Claims Occupancy Act applies generally to unpatented and unpatentable mining claims which were used as principal places of residence on October 23, 1962, and since July 23, 1955.
The law permits certain "old" occupancy situations to be legalized for as long as the public interest allows.
Under certain circumstances, persons living on unpatented mining claims may acquire an interest in the lands from the Federal Government.
A 5-year period had been provided for people to apply for privileges under the act.
The act was passed as the key measure to terminate the unauthorized occupancy of public lands based on invalid mining claims.
Public Law 87–713 excludes petrified wood from location under the mining laws and provides for free use of it by hobbyists and scientists.
The law was passed to protect the public recreation values of deposits of petrified wood on the public lands.
The Bureau of Land Management is responsible for the conservation, management, and development of nearly one-half billion acres of the Nation's public lands.
They include nearly 300 million acres in Alaska and some 175 million acres in 27 other States.
In his first natural resources message, President Kennedy called the Nation's attention to the importance of the public lands under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management.
His message contained a mandate for action and established conservation goals to which the Department is committed.
The portions of this program particularly applicable to the lands and recreation activities of BLM are the inventory and evaluation of the public lands outside Alaska, and the development of a program of multiple use designed to reconcile the conflicts among the wide variety of uses of these lands.
The Bureau's goals in this connection are: the development of public land laws responsive to conditions which now exist; improvement of the land tenure pattern; substantial reduction in annual resource losses from fire, insects, unauthorized use, vandalism, water pollution, and waste; and improvements and extensions of access roads, structures, and facilities for the protection, improvement, and recreational use of the scenic, wildlife, and other resources of the public lands.
The moratorium declared by the Secretary against the filing of nonmineral applications for public lands in all Western States ended September 4, 1962.
The Bureau of Land Management maintains facilities on public lands for recreationa use of scenic and wildlife resources.
This covered picnic area with elevated stove is part of an accelerated public works project at the Red Cliffs Recreation site near St. George, Utah.
Bureau of Land Management was able to reduce a backlog of more than 41,000 applications to less than 18,000, a reduction of approximately 57 percent.
Outside Alaska (where because of the settlement laws, the moratorium had only minor applications) there was an even more effective reduction of two-thirds.
In addition, the moratorium was lifted ahead of schedule in 8 of the 17 States originally affected.
Elimination of the greater part of the pending caseload resulted in action on the cases and also freed personnel and resources for other important work.
The Master Unit Study System, put into operation during fiscal 1962 in direct response to the President's call for "an inventory and evaluation of the Nation's public domain holdings," was progressing on about 175 million acres of public lands.
Accumulate all available basic data, and on the basis of these data define general units of study.
Outline, schedule, and effect the action programs.
Thus the system will be, in effect, the first master planning tool for these public lands.
By year's end, trained technicians had completed nearly all initial analysis work.
Detailed analysis started in many areas.
During fiscal 1963, 4,858 patents were issued by the Bureau of Land Management which transferred ownership of 639,316 acres.
This total does not include 20,534 acres in school lands, 82,944 acres in Indian Fee and reissue trusts, and 67,905 acres in curative and supplemental patents, a total of 171,384 acres not included in the final total.
These disposals were made under a variety of public land laws to private citizens and nonprofit organizations, State, county, and local governments, and other Federal agencies.
The Bureau issued 441 patents for 59,874 acres under the homestead laws and 231 patents issued for 52,662 acres under the Desert Land Act for agricultural development.
In addition, 2,162 small tracts were patented involving 7,343 acres.
There were 83 exchanges consummated on a total of 66,062 acres.
Conveyed to the States were 262,565 acres under 88 separate grants.
For a discussion of disposals made under the Recreation and Public Purposes Act, see the following subsection.
The use of the public land under jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management for outdoor recreation purposes continued to increase rapidly.
Recreation is becoming a full partner with livestock grazing, mining, timber production, and other resource management activities.
However, private development and needs are exerting great pressure on all these resources, especially in areas where population is expanding rapidly.
Every year many millions of people hunt, fish, camp, and picnic on the 466 million acres of BLM-administered land, most of which is in 12 Western States, including Alaska.
These lands contain some of the most spectacular desert scenery and rugged mountain and canyon country in the United States.
There were over 15 million recreation visits to such lands in 1963.
But because of the lack of even minimum sanitation and recreation facilities on most of the land, many visitors unintentionally abuse the areas, creating litter and fire hazards, accelerating erosion, and polluting vital water sources.
The need for designated recreation sites with essential facilities to protect the public lands and to provide for their recreational use by the public has led the Department to request funds for the construction of minimum facilities.
Under the authority of the Oregon & California Act of 1937, some 50 campgrounds and picnic areas have been built since 1958 in western Oregon.
As a pilot effort, the 1963 Accelerated Public Works program provided about $1,400,000 to construct minimum access and protective facilities on 49 public land sites in economically depressed counties of 8 States.
Recreation, fish, and wildlife resources on the public lands are being inventoried and evaluated.
Acute problem areas will be identified for corrective action, including the installation of needed facilities.
The overall potential of the land to provide public benefit will be determined.
The long-range objective is effective integration of recreation resources and their proper functions into a system of multiple use.
Important aspects of the inventory are the identification of archeological and historical remains for protection and the identification of sites suitable for transfer to non-Federal public agencies under the Recreation and Public Purposes Act of 1954.
Working for BLM, employees of accelerated public works improved boat-launching facilities on Walker Lake, near Reno, Nev.
Improvement of wildlife habitat and preservation of the wildlife resource is a basic part of the Department's program to insure the best care and management of the public domain.
Fourteen land management areas in California totaling 810,570 acres of public lands are being managed on a cooperative basis by the Bureau of Land Management and the State.
Plans for special intensive management on a demonstration basis of scenic, wildlife, and other natural resources are being formulated for certain other areas in California, Oregon, and Utah.
In harmony with the recommendations of the Outdoor Recreation Resources Review Commission, States and local government agencies are encouraged to acquire tracts of public domain land for recreation and other public purposes under the Recreation and Public Purposes Act.
The land is made available only if a definite plan of utilization and schedule of development are submitted.
By establishing the low charges of $2.50 per acre for purchases and 25 cents per acre per year for lease, the Department encourages communities to expand their open space and recreation programs.
During the past 2 years, 133 patents totaling 11,277 acres have been issued under the act and 142 leases totaling 90,000 acres have been put in effect.
To stimulate even greater use of this opportunity for State-Federal cooperation, the Department has published a comprehensive brochure which explains to prospective applicants the opportunities that exist under this program and the procedures that are to be followed in making application.
Of growing significance are the patents issued under the Recreation and Public Purposes Act.
During fiscal 1963, 98 patents were issued under the act for 11,816 acres.
Of these, 73 patents were issued for 10,275 acres under the new special pricing schedule of $2.50 per acre.
Some of the land conveyed under this act is used for public education and public health purposes.
Included in the vear's Recreation and Public Purposes transfers were Angel Island, San Francisco Bay, Calif.
Imperial Hot Spa, California; Smith Rocks State Park, Oregon; and Grand Lake Park, Grand County, Colo.
On September 14, 1962, the President signed into law the Public Works Acceleration Act (Public Law 87-658).
This law enabled Federal agencies to initiate or accelerate, upon approval, public works projects to help erase unemployment.
Local workers employed under the accelerated public works program are shown improving an access trail to the scenic Rio Grande Gorge administered by the Bureau of Land Management in New Mexico.
The type of public works intended by the legislation proved ideal for the Bureau of Land Management.
Most of the Bureau's projects are relatively small and can be accelerated and completed in a short time.
The completed projects have an immediate beneficial effect on public lands and also aid in the future management of the land's water, wildlife, forage, mineral, and recreational resources.
Everything of value was utilized.
Fenceposts salvaged from downed juniper trees were used in fencing the area to protect the tree and grass seedlings until they could become established.
Protection and sanitation facilities were constructed at three sites.
Canyonlands Project, Utah: This project included the construction of protection and sanitation facilities along the eastern rim of the Colorado River.
These facilities are within a buffer zone surrounding the proposed Canyonlands National Park.
Nearly 600 man-years of on-site employment were created on BLM administered lands.
In addition, the APW program has enabled many citizens to become closely acquainted with the functions of BLM in the administration of the public lands.
Through the APW program, the Bureau of Land Management demonstrated its ability to proceed on short notice with any improvement, protection, conservation, or maintenance program on the public lands under its jurisdiction.
In the years ahead, increasing demands will be made on the Nation's forests, one of our most vital renewable resources.
The country will need lumber, plywood, and pulp, and other forest products.
By 1980, the Nation's demand for timber is expected to be at least 25 percent greater than now.
In addition, the forest lands themselves are a source of much of the Nation's water, forage, recreational opportunities, minerals, and wildlife.
To meet all these future needs, increasingly efficient forest and woodland management is necessary throughout the Nation.
The Bureau of Land Management, in its own area of administration, is striving to meet this challenge by applying the latest techniques in multiple-use forest management.
To approach uniformity in timber sale and management practices on Federal forest lands, the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior continued the cooperative effort that began subsequent to President Kennedy's request in 1961.
Differences in timber sale and inventory practices were studied further in 1963.
To meet future demands, more wood fiber must be obtained from fewer acres.
A major goal for all BLM commercial forest land in the Western States is to reach a maximum sustained-yield level.
The management of the Oregon and California Railroad Grant Lands (O&C), the Coos Bay Wagon Road Lands (CBWR), and public domain lands in western Oregon has pointed the way to such an objective.
Lands administered by BLM in western Oregon are producing timber at an annual rate of approximately 1 billion 127 million board feet.
These lands are examples of intensive, large-scale administration of public forest land.
Besides these projects, management activity on approximately 4 million additional acres of commercial forest lands in the Western States was being steadily increased to bring these forests to full sustained yield capacity.
Woodlands management will be increased on another 29 million acres of lands.
On October 12, 1962, a wind and rain storm hit the west coast with hurricane force.
It toppled or damaged approximately 11/ billion board feet of timber on lands administered by BLM.
Plans to sell the allowable cut of green timber had to be abandoned Instead, the Bureau faced the gigantic task of measuring and preparing the salvage timber for sale before a deadline imposed by the twin hazards of damage by fire and insects.
A further complication was the scattered, jackstraw pattern of the damage, a condition which made access doubly difficult.
In cooperation with other public agencies and with the timber industry, BLM immediately started planning a salvage program.
This program sought to minimize losses from the storm by removing damaged timber by the summer of 1964, and at the same time maintain the sensitive market balance in the lumber industry.
By year's end, BLM had sold approximately 926,544,000 board feet of salvage and green timber and was ahead of schedule in the salvage program.
During the past year, both before the storm and after, the volume of timber sold from these lands totaled 1,567,267,000 board feet valued at $36 million, a substantial contribution to the economy of western Oregon.
Timber sales from public domain lands in eastern Oregon and in Western States contributed over 100 million board feet of timber valued at approximately $1.1 million.
The major objective of Federal land and resource management is to meet future resource requirements.
A progressive program for the development, improvement, and conservation of public lands assures adequate land and resources for tomorrow.
In keeping with this objective, BLM has started an accelerated program of forest development.
In areas where the economy is closely related to harvesting and procuring forest products, it is imperative that forest lands be restored to a productive state as soon after the harvest as possible.
Prior to 1958, a total of approximately 34,000 acres under the Bureau's stewardship had been reforested.
Since then, the reforestation program has been increasing at the average rate of 18,700 acres annually.
This program is designed to assure a sustained and continuing crop of timber.
In fiscal 1963, approximately 24,000 acres of forest land were planted with forest tree seedlings and approximately 15,000 acres were seeded.
This reforestation effort was largely devoted to areas where timber had been harvested.
In addition, areas which had been denuded by fire were reforested to restore them to productive status and to curb erosion.
On certain lands, site improvements are a prerequisite to the reestablishment of forests.
These improvements include snag felling, terracing, eradication of competing brush, and soil scarification (loosening the soil preparatory to planting young trees).
In fiscal 1963, site improvements on 14,323 acres were completed.
Commercial thinnings, which have as their objective the production of superior crop trees and the removal of poorly formed or undesirable trees, resulted in the harvest in western Oregon of 7,657,000 board feet with a value of $147,089.
Thinnings were also made on approximately 6,500 acres of forest lands where the trees had not yet reached commercial size.
While there is no immediate monetary return from the trees removed in such operations, the result is increased volume and value on stands which may otherwise stagnate.
Growth of the remaining trees is often dramatic when young stands have been thinned.
A full inventory is necessary for sustained yield management.
A forest inventory, similar to that completed in western Oregon in 1959, was underway during the year on the commercial timberlands of the public domain in other Western States.
It is scheduled for completion in 1965.
Permanent sample plots are being established so that periodic reinventory can be made.
Full multiple use of the Nation's forest lands requires a good access road system.
To harvest forest resources roads must be designed and built for heavy logging equipment.
The Bureau of Land Management constructed many miles of high-standard logging roads in order to make possible harvesting mature green timber, and salvaging dead and dying timber.
Accelerated Public Works funds paid for expansion of this road network to get loggers into remote areas of windthrown timber.
Such a system helped make possible the Oregon salvage operation after the October storm.
Access roads allow the full utilization of forest products.
Thinning programs can be conducted, and small-volume or low-value sales can be made in areas where roadbuilding costs would otherwise prohibit them, especially to small operators.
Access roads serve two other important purposes.
They are needed to protect the forest from fires, insects, and disease.
They make many acres of public land accessible to the public for recreational activities such as fishing, hunting, picnicking, and camping.
In managing the Federal rangelands in fiscal 1963, the Bureau of Land Management emphasized the principle of multiple use and the development of the range's full productive potential.
Evidence of changing conditions in the overall condition of BLM's 170 million acres of semiarid western rangelands develops slowly.
Nevertheless, there has been marked improvement on seeded ranges and ranges that have received brush control or other rehabilitation measures.
The most significant progress was made in laying the foundation for both continued improvement of the range and production of forage.
This foundation for progress is being developed by bringing forage harvest and plant growth into balance, selecting sites which will respond to land treatment operations, and planning programs to provide optimum use of resources and sustained full production.
The BLM continued its resource inventory program—which provides accurate maps and data on forage production, range types, and existing and needed improvements.
During the year, 8,489,680 acres were inventoried in statutory grazing districts.
Before the year, 99,354,439 acres had been inventoried.
Of the 156,643,572 acres of Federal lands suitable for grazing, 98,799,453 acres remain to be inventoried.
All lands within statutory grazing districts are programed for inventory by 1966.
Basic requirements for sound range management include determination of individual applicants' qualifications for Federal range use, apportioning the available range in accordance with their qualifications, and assignment of use areas and grazing seasons.
These activities—termed "adjudication"—are necessary to stabilize the livestock industry dependent upon the public range—an objective fixed by the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934.
Adjudication was given high priority during 1963 and is scheduled for completion by July 1, 1967.
The Bureau conducted field surveys of range conditions on approximately 20 percent of the Federal lands in the organized grazing districts.
This condition survey activity provides for repeat surveys on ranges every fifth year.
Data on range conditions are extremely valuable in developing and improving range management plans.
Surveys of the current use of forage by livestock, big game, and other animals were conducted on many range areas.
Big-game concentration areas, rehabilitation sites, and problem areas received particular attention.
State game departments cooperated in surveys of important wildlife areas.
Evaluation of data on the use of forage (in view of the normal year's plant growth) helped BLM experts determine how much livestock and wildlife the land should support, and how much hunting is suitable.
Following a 2-year study, fees for grazing livestock on public lands were increased from 19 cents per animal unit month to 30 cents per animal month.
At the same time the portion of the fees designated for range improvement was increased from 25 percent to 331/3 percent.
This has the effect of doubling the funds designated for range improvement.
The grazing fee increase was part of a continuing program of review and adjustment to maintain reasonable public land resource user fees and charges.
Scientific range management is still young and many problems remain to be solved to create an optimum balance between production and use of range resources.
During the past year, the Bureau emphasized range studies and research.
Revised procedures for making forage inventories on public rangelands were issued following several years' study of research findings and consultation with the Nation's leading ecologists and range scientists.
This study helped inaugurate many new management techniques for rangelands.
The Bureau is working to integrate economic analysis into its resource management programs.
An economist trained in benefitcost studies was employed to prepare a handbook on economic analysis.
Although the experience of other agencies can be most helpfu! in planning water resource projects, the development of economic analysis procedures for activities of the Bureau of Land Management is a pioneering effort.
Relatively little work has been done on the economics of public land resources.
The Bureau continued working closely with Federal, State, and private research agencies, with special emphasis on economic considerations.
The study of western livestock ranches with the Economic Research Service, the Forest Service, and three agricultural experiment stations—begun last year—was completed.
An interim report filed with the Bureau and the Forest Service was used in advisory board deliberations on grazing fees.
The researchers submitted for review a manuscript of the final comprehensive report to be published in 1964.
The BLM began a cooperative study with the Oregon Agricultural Experiment Station on rates of return from investments in public rangeland improvements.
Economists and ecologists are seeking to relate economic information to basic ecological data, using modern computer techniques.
In cooperation with the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife began a new study to determine the effects of various types of rangeland fences on pronghorn antelope.
The study, being conducted in Wyoming, has received widespread interest and support from stockmen's and sportsmen's groups, as well as State and Federal agencies.
Millions of acres of public lands are covered with piñon pine and juniper scrub.
These species have been considered almost worthless and thousands of acres have been cleared and seeded to grass.
In fiscal 1963 the BLM began a cooperative study with the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station on unrealized potentials of these vast piñon pine and juniper areas.
The relationship of the trees to the water and soil conditions of the areas is being examined in this study.
It involves teams of plant ecologists, soils technicians, and economists and is being conducted throughout the West where piñon-juniper woodlands and ranges are important.
To learn more about range productivity, BLM's range managers use many types of test plots such as the deer-proof enclosure cn the left and the cattle-proof enclosure on the right in the Owyhee Project area of southwestern Idaho.
State experiment stations in Montana, Utah, and Arizona, the Bureau, and the Forest Service, agreed on a new study of range economics.
Included will be an economic comparison of ranches using public rangelands to those using private rangelands.
Different methods of determining the economic values of range also will be tested.
Studies of the tenure problems encountered by users of public land resources started.
A special committee of the National Advisory Board Council met to analyze these complex problems.
The committee submitted recommendations for the consideration of district advisory boards.
The Bureau is providing professional assistance to groups cooperating in this continuing study.
The Bureau continued its cooperative study with the Soil Conservation Service of procedures for soil and vegetation inventories.
The purpose is to determine the feasibility of using standard soil survey procedures or some modification of them in BLM resource inventories.
The standard soil survey procedures were devised for agricultural lands.
To be practical for use on vast acreages of semiarid grazing lands, survey procedures must be economical and accurate.
In addition, they must provide data that are subject to meaningful interpretation for management purposes.
The study will be concluded in 1964 with a consolidated report of findings at sites in Montana, Nevada, and New Mexico.
Acceleration characterized the Bureau's resource conservation and development program in 1963.
Plans were made on the basis of the total resources in individual small watersheds.
There were more than 640 of these development units, or community watersheds.
Each watershed is a community of interest, with natural boundaries and similar soils, vegetation, and user interest.
Total conservation needs of each community watershed are being determined by resource inventories and conservation surveys.
Onthe-ground application of key practices, including range seeding, brush control, water management, and fencing, has been started in areas of greatest need.
Complete conservation treatment programs were begun in four demonstration areas.
They lie principally in the Vale District in Oregon (the Vale Project), the Winnemucca District in Nevada (the Beowawe Project), the Boise District in Idaho (the Owyhee Project), and the Albuquerque District in New Mexico (the Rio Puerco Project).
The rehabilitation of 158,000 acres of rangeland by seeding, brush control, and mechanical land treatment is among the major accomplishments in these demonstration areas.
The protection and proper use of these treated areas have been assured by modern grazing practices and by the construction of 300 miles of fences and 135 new stockwater developments.
Severely eroded areas have required the construction of 45 detention dams and numerous other structures.
The number of forest and range fires during fiscal year 1963 dropped.
Emergency treatment was given all fire-damaged lands where needed.
Reforestation and range seeding on burned areas help prevent excessive flood and sediment damage and also assure production of timber and forage and of a continuous protective cover for the watershed.
Special problems in the control of poisonous and noxious weeds were identified and control measures were applied.
Laid barren by a disastrous fire 4 years ago, these now grass-covered hills in Idaho were restored and the soil stabilized by terracing and seeding done by the Bureau of Land Management.
Grazing by domestic livestock is a primary use of rangelands administered by the Bureau.
All BLM range conservation and development activities are planned with grazing and grazing potential as a major factor.
In addition, recreation, mining, forestry, watershed, and other uses are fully considered in planning and development.
Local and State organizations are consulted and encouraged to become full partners in the planning and execution of range-development programs.
Americans receive many important benefits from wildlife on the public rangelands.
Hunting, photography, and merely observing wildlife in its natural habitat are recreational activities of physical, cultural, and social benefit.
Because of the Nation's increasing population, leisure time, and per capita income, these recreational activities have a prominent place in BLM's programs.
The Bureau's habitat development and management programs provide optimum numbers of game animals.
Access roads on the public lands facilitate recreational use of wildlife resources as well as BLM's own projects of land improvement.
The BLM estimates that the number of big-game animals inhabiting public rangelands outside Alaska in 1963 was 2,055,989, compared to 1,928,053 in 1962 and 1,900,529 in 1961.
Wildlife and domestic livestock share the public ranges and the Bureau has a responsibility to maintain range resources in such a way that both will thrive.
State game and fish agencies, of course, have full control over scientific herd management and harvesting of game, so that disease and starvation will not result from overpopulation of game animals.
Most of the Bureau's State offices had full-time wildlife specialists in the field during fiscal 1963, conducting independent studies and working with range managers.
The pronghorn antelope fencing study in Wyoming was only one of the special projects undertaken.
Others included a study of the Black Rock deer herd in Arizona, which had grown so large that it was destroying the range and starving itself.
As a result of the study, hunting pressure on the herd was adjusted and the herd was brought into proper balance with the livestock that share its range.
In Nevada, the BLM is conducting an experiment on a new wildlife management instrument: the deer funnel.
By a network of fences, deer are made to go through a specially built funnel under a highway.
The BLM developed this device in cooperation with the Nevada fish and game officials to avoid accidents often fatal to both deer and automobile riders.
The BLM further recognized the importance of wildlife resources on the public lands when it took steps at the close of the fiscal year to staff its Washington office with a wildlife technician to guide wildlife specialists in the field.
Each State office was instructed to have a full-time wildlife specialist on its staff.
The public mineral resources of the United States are the source of many raw materials for industry.
The Bureau of Land Management has the duty of insuring the availability of mineral resources to the mineral industries and of encouraging exploration and development of minerals in accordance with the principles of conservation and orderly development.
Proper management of these nonrenewable resources requires informed classification of lands, adherence to a policy of conservation, and resolution of any conflicts in land development or use.
The Bureau of Land Management administers the mineral resources under the General Mining Laws, the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, the Materials Disposal Act of 1947, and other leasing acts which pertain to acquired lands, special areas, and the Outer Continental Shelf.
A minerals study program announced in 1962 called for a comprehensive analysis of the existing and potential mineral resources of the public lands.
The basic phase of this "Minerals Inventory" is a preliminary compilation of known geologic and economic data.
Excellent progress was made on this compilation, and a continuing analysis to refine the data will be carried on.
The total area being studied in the Minerals Inventory is over 480 million acres of public lands in the Western States, including Alaska.
The first phase of this inventory and evaluation of federally owned mineral resources has been completed by 7 of the 11 State offices.
The remaining States average 75 percent completion.
Rockhounds find many treasures on public lands, and with passage of legislation in the fall of 1962, free use of the public lands for rockhounding has been assured while the commercial collection of petrified wood and other collector's materials is regulated.
There are two products of the initial analysis phase.
Maps of individual master units show known or suspected areas of valuable minerals.
Summaries of the geology and mineral development furnish supplementary technical information on the areas.
These initial reports serve as a tool for land planning and classification and as a base for refining and developing meaningful resource data for the areas.
The administration of mineral leasing for public lands is particularly vital to the Nation's mineral fuel industries.
While the greatest activity continues to be in the oil and gas field, other leasable minerals such as potash, sodium, and coal are of major importance in certain States and areas.
In addition, disposition of minerals, other than the leasing act minerals, is accomplished by permits and leases for acquired lands.
The activity in simultaneous filings for oil and gas leases continued at a lively rate.
The BLM constantly investigates possible abuses of this system.
Proposed new regulations, which clearly define what constitutes collusive filings, will deter abuses.
The first leases for oil and gas exploration were issued for the North Kaibab National Forest area in northern Arizona.
After much deliberation by the Departments of Agriculture and Interior, the area was opened and 127 leases issued, subject to rigid stipulations to safeguard the area's scenic and wildlife resources.
The Multiple Surface Use Act (Public Law 167, 84th Cong.) authorizes the Bureau of Land Management to determine whether the Government or the miner has the right to manage surface resources of unpatented mining claims on federally owned land.
The Bureau has adjudicated such surface rights determinations at the request of the Forest Service for most of the national forest lands.
A limited program has been carried out for BLM-administered lands.
Additional surface rights determinations will be made as necessary for the proper administration of public land resources.
Such determinations are being made to facilitate the Vale project in Oregon and to manage timber areas in Wyoming.
Determinations have been completed for 6,705,838 acres of public domain lands.
A mining claim utilization survey was conducted for the 12 Western States, including Alaska.
This survey was made to estimate the number of mining claims started, the number currently active, and the use pattern for both patented and unpatented claims.
The survey reveals that approximately 6 million mining claims were started in the 90 years between 1872 and 1962 in these 12 States.
About 160,000 such claims were active on BLM lands in fiscal 1963.
The information from this survey is being analyzed in relation to long-term planning for the BLM minerals program.
A review of the number of mineral patents over a 20-year period reveals a direct relation between the volume of patents issued and uranium boom years, which were also periods of high metal periods.
A trend toward greater acreage per patent indicates the growing importance of industrial minerals of high volume but low unit value.
For over a year, the Department of the Interior and the Federal Bureau of Investigation have examined questionable applications under the mining laws for over 14,000 acres of public lands near Phoenix, Ariz.
If approved, the mineral patent applications would have allowed the applicants to receive title to the land for $2.50 per acre.
Land in the burgeoning Phoenix area is worth up to $200 an acre for subdivision or other purposes.
Salting" a claim consists of adding gold to low-yield ore to increase the assayer's estimate of the ore's value.
On April 16, Secretary Udall ordered a “freeze" on pending and future applications.
Shortly thereafter, the patent applications for 14,591 acres were voluntarily withdrawn.
It is the responsibility of the Bureau of Land Management to determine, when necessary, the validity of mining claims on lands administered by other Government agencies.
During the year, such investigations were carried out of the Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy, the Bureau of Reclamation, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the Bureau of Public Roads.
In Arizona, for example, a project was being completed in which validity determinations for approximately 18,000 mining claims on the 23/ million acre Papago Indian Reservation was undertaken.
This work has resolved title uncertainties to mineral rights and has enabled thè Papago Tribe to embark on a prospecting permit and leasing program for their lands, which lie in one of the most active areas of the Nation for mining.
Several laws directed toward specific mining claims situations were enacted.
Two acts (Public Laws 87-747 and 754) withdrew certain areas in Arizona from mining claim location to facilitate high-value surface development.
In these areas the surface had previously been patented, but the minerals were reserved by the Government.
The Bureau of Land Management continued its interest in the modernization of mining laws.
The need for such modernization is now generally accepted.
In fiscal 1963 a study draft of a general revision was circulated to the mining industry for review and comment.
The public lands are the source of much of the materials essential to the construction and roadbuilding industries in the Western States.
Fill material, sand, concrete aggregate, lightweight aggregates for building blocks, and clay for bricks are becoming increasingly important.
Not generally subject to the mining or leasing laws, such materials are made available by contract sale to companies and individuals and by free-use permits to communities and State agencies.
Community pits are being established to make materials available in small lots where needed.
New legislation now makes it possible to negotiate sales of materials exceeding $1,000 in cases where public interest dictates rapid consummation of the transactions.
Thus, the delay caused by advertising and competitive sales is eliminated.
The first leasing office for the Outer Continental Shelf on the west coast was opened in Los Angeles during the year.
The initial offering of oil and gas leases by that office in May resulted in the leasing of 57 tracts totaling over 300,000 acres for cash bonuses of $12,807,587 and $938,838 first year's rental.
An earlier offering of nine leases in proven offshore areas by the New Orleans office yielded cash bonuses of $43,887,385, plus $161,780 first year's rental.
Interest in offshore mineral leasing for oil and gas continued high.
Offshore oil and gas explorations moved forward in 1963 with the sale of several leases off California—the first west coast sale of Outer Continental Shelf leases by the Federal Government.
Meanwhile, OCS explorations and drilling in the Gulf of Mexico continues at a high pace.
Rigs capable of drilling in greater water depths and new underwater completion and servicing techniques have been developed.
Techniques for extracting other minerals offshore are still in a relatively early stage, but interest is active.
Leasing maps of the entire Continental Shelf off Oregon and Washington were published during the year.
These maps extend seaward from the outer limit of the State's jurisdiction to a water depth of 500 fathoms (3,000 feet).
Previously issued Outer Continental Shelf maps have been extended only to a water depth of 100 fathoms.
Extension to include the greater depths was made at the request of the oil industry which claims that new drilling and production techniques make oil operations feasible at these greater depths.
Areas of Outer Continental Shelf covered by the newly published maps are 5 million acres off Oregon and 3 million acres off Washington.
An essential part of the management of lands and resources under Bureau of Land Management jurisdiction is to protect them from the destructive forces of nature and the carelessness and willfulness of man.
This protection is provided through prevention and suppression of fires, control of forest insects and diseases, prevention and control of unauthorized use, and protection of visitors on the public laņds.
Modern techniques and equipment have increased fire-control and aided BLM protection efforts on forested public lands.
Here BLM smoke-jumpers descend on a blaze while it is still small.
Modern techniques and equipment have increased fire-control accomplishments in recent years.
However, fire remains one of the principal enemies of our forests, rangelands, and watersheds.
During calendar year 1962, the number of fires and the area burned was somewhat less than the average for the past 5 years.
A total of 1,083 fires burned 164,111 acres in 1962, compared to the 5-year average of 1,370 fires which burned 444,099 acres annually.
The fire-control objective was to train, organize, and develop a force to hold fire losses to a minimum.
Weather and burning conditions were nearly normal for the season.
The fire season occurred somewhat later than usual because substantial winter snows and spring rains kept fuels damp.
Although this precipitation contributed to the growth of light flammable fuels which could have caused an extreme fire hazard, cool weather through most of the fire season held the moisture content of vegetation high enough to counteract the hazard caused by the abundance of fuels.
A near-normal season, combined with aggressive and improved fire-control methods, helped keep resource losses well below the 5-year average.
In preparation for the fire season, all equipment and tools were readied and fire guards were assigned to specific areas.
During the past year, training for fire supervisory personnel increased.
All districts conducted training sessions for Bureau of Land Management personnel, and in many cases sent trainees to cooperative schools conducted by the Forest Service, State fire or forestry departments, and other agencies.
The first National Interbureau Fire Behavior Training School conducted by the Department of the Interior was held in January for fire supervisors from several States.
The Bureau also cooperated with other fire-protection agencies in organizing and training specialized firefighting crews.
The Southwest Forest Fire Fighters, in Arizona and New Mexico, are Indians and Mexican nationals.
They have been available for several years and have proved to be an asset in fire-control work.
Training for similar specialized crews started in several other States, including Alaska.
Emphasis was on training fire supervisors in organizing and managing men and equipment.
In 1962, areas burned over included 164,111 acres of Federal land and 186,694 acres of State and private lands protected by the Bureau of Land Management.
Damage to Federal lands was nearly $11/2 million, and to State and private lands nearly $1/2 million.
Nearly 28,000 man-days were spent fighting fires.
Suppression cost was almost $1.5 million.
Lightning caused 45 percent of the fires, while in 1961 it had been responsible for 62 percent.
Many advances were made in 1962 and early 1963 in improving detection facilities and constructing new lookouts.
These new and improved detection facilities, in conjunction with aerial surveillance, alleviated the danger of fires spreading over a large acreage before detection.
Many more facilities and a more complete network of truck trails and roads into large blocks of public land are needed to reach an optimum standard of fire control.
Teaming up to battle a range fire in Idaho, two BLM employtees and a local rancher work to bring the fire under control.
Private companies, State agencies, and even Federal agencies (such as the Forest Service) sometimes contract to protect BLM lands on a per-acre basis.
Lands under such fire protection in Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, Oregon, Washington, and Minnesota experienced a season of near-normal climatic conditions.
The average number of fires per year for the past 5 years was 248.
There were 261 fires in 1962.
During the 1962 season, 67 percent of all fires on lands protected by contract were man caused, while in 1961 the figure was 25 percent.
This comparison emphasizes the need for continued expansion of the fire-protection program.
The use of the Bureau's aircraft in fire-control activity is increasing each year.
Nearly 300,000 gallons of fire-retarding slurry were dropped on fires suppressed by the Bureau, with positive results reported on 91 percent of all aerial drops.
The slurry was bentonite and sodium-calcium borate.
Helicopters were used for accurate droppings of small amounts of fire-retardant slurry, for transportation of men and tools, for fast initial action of fires in remote areas, and for shuttling men and equipment on the fire line of large fires.
Unauthorized use is a chronic problem in public land management.
The BLM has a two-part program to control unauthorized use.
The public is informed of the facts and dangers of trespass and a vigorous program of enforcement and control is maintained.
A backlog of 1,375 known trespass cases of various types existed at the beginning of fiscal 1963.
During the year, 1,358 new cases developed, making a workload of 2,733 cases.
Of this total, 1,982 cases were closed, leaving a backlog of only 751 cases.
These trespass cases range from the unintentional to the criminal, and are widespread in all the public land States.
The most serious tree disease affecting timber on land administered by the Bureau of Land Management is white pine blister rust, common to all five-needle pines.
Eradication of the alternate host plant remains the principal measure for control of the disease, which is most widespread in northern Idaho, northern California, and western Oregon.
The alternate hosts for white pine blister rust are several species of a shrub of the genus Ribes.
Eradication of Ribes was conducted on forest lands in Oregon, where sugar pine is the major species of commercial timber.
During the 1962 field season, 83,000 Ribes plants were destroyed on approximately 560 acres.
Two additional possibilities for controlling white pine blister rust appear promising.
One is the treatment of infected sapling and pole-size trees with an antibiotic.
During the 1962 field season, 20,708 trees were treated on 142 acres.
Antibiotic treatments are still in the experimental stage.
The other possibility is the breeding of rust-resistant seedlings.
This involves locating rustresistant trees, controlling pollination by placing bags over the cones, and obtaining seeds that will produce rust-resistant stock.
The Bureau of Land Management installed bags on 94 sugar pine and 26 western white pine.
Eventually, either the antibiotic treatment or the rust-resistant trees will eliminate the control system of grubbing or chemically treating Ribes.
Insect attacks are difficult to detect before they have reached epidemic proportions, thus making control difficult.
Annual timber damage by insects is many times greater than by fire.
The BLM carried out bark beetle control projects in Wyoming, Colorado, and California.
Approximately 22,000 trees on more than 6,000 acres were treated.
A control project was started in Montana for a spruce budworm infestation.
Adequate control of these infestations will require several years.
Increasing public use of the public lands for recreation places greater requirements on the visitor protection program.
The Bureau's visitor-protection objective is to identify, isolate, and correct hazards that threaten the general welfare and safety of citizens enjoying the public lands.
Wayside shelters and sanitation facilities should be provided.
A basic searchand-rescue organization should be developed for emergencies.
Surveying the public lands is the oldest activity of the Department of the Interior.
The U.S. rectangular system of public land surveys was the first technically designed and nationally coordinated cadastral survey system in modern history.
It is essential to all public land transactions.
Outside Alaska some 112 million acres of public land remain unsurveyed.
Much is under permanent withdrawals and until recently little or no demand for surveys had been anticipated.
However, there are indications that some unsurveyed land, particularly in the national forests, has an exchange value which can be used to consolidate and improve the management of Federal lands.
Because only surveyed public land can be used for exchange purposes, requests for original surveys are increasing.
For practical purposes the survey of common school sections outside reservations is complete with the exception of school sections in California.
School sections in reservations cannot be acquired by the State upon survey.
However, the States normally can select '"lieu" public lands to compensate for the loss of school lands in reservations.
Because of the large quantity of unselected lieu lands remaining to the credit of Utah, a demand for surveys in that State is effected so unsurveyed lands can be made available for selection.
Resurveys are needed principally because much of the evidence of the original surveys, made 50 to 150 years ago, has either disappeared or is becoming difficult to identify.
In the extensive farming areas, the first settlers quickly erected fences or constructed roads along their common property lines.
These lines have been perpetuated.
But in the more remote areas, many boundaries of lands taken up for stockraising or other nonintensive uses have become obliterated.
This condition has resulted because of the ravages of time, impermanent original monuments, and such forces as erosion, animals, and man.
Since in many of these areas private land is intermingled with public land, it is becoming increasingly important for management and administrative operations to identify the boundaries of the public lands.
The private landowner also benefits indirectly from these resurveys, since the boundaries of his land common with the public land are resurveyed and marked at the same time.
The generally increasing value of real estate also contributes to the demand for resurveys.
A large number of special-purpose resurveys were made during the year in the BLM's valuable timberlands to gather information for timber sales and to detect timber trespasses for civil or criminal prosecution.
Resurveys were also made to locate areas suitable for multiple use under mining laws and the land laws.
Well underway in fiscal 1963 were cooperative projects with the Forest Service to remonument public land survey corners of the boundaries of the western national forests.
Under a cooperative agreement, Forest Service personnel search for original survey corner evidence, and BLM cadastral engineers examine this evidence and accept or reject it as a genuine survey marker.
If accepted, the corner evidence is perpetuated by a BLM standard brass-capped iron post.
Such marker reestablishment becomes part of the official survey records.
Some 360 million acres of public lands are unsurveyed in Alaska.
Because of remoteness, climate, and physical characteristics of terrain, much of this area need never be surveyed.
Surveying in Alaska has been concentrated on those lands selected by the State under the terms of its entry into the Union.
The new State was granted over 103 million acres, with the right to make selections over a 25-year period.
To meet these State selection needs, the Bureau of Land Management increased its surveying organization in Alaska.
Fieldwork was accelerated to meet a yearly survey requirement goal of 4 million acres—the average needed to provide transfer of the 103 million acres to the State in the stipulated period.
Under the Statehood Act, the Bureau has surveyed only exterior boundaries of approved selections at intervals averaging 2 miles.
In the expanded program in Alaska, new survey techniques have been developed and used.
These involve electronic distancemeasuring devices, photogrammetric procedures, and improved instruments.
Resource management for the public lands requires that access be provided to remote areas.
A Public Lands Development Road and Trails Program has been started and a transportation plan for each State has been developed.
This is the initial step in developing a road system in the Bureau to facilitate accelerated management programs.
Continued efforts have been made toward the standardization of buildings and other structures incorporated in the Bureau construction program.
The program to provide usable maps for resource management techniques continued satisfactorily.
Cattle water at a tank near Idaho Falls, Idaho, on public lands administered by BLM.
A handbook was published to standardize signs and further their use to help inform the public of the Bureau's work.
A handbook on development of roads and trails on the public lands is planned.
Radiocommunication services expanded throughout the year.
A typical accomplishment was the extension of such communications to an area of 300,000 acres of range and timber lands in Montana.
In practically every State, new areas of public lands were "opened" to communications essential to fire prevention and control.
The Bureau improved this important service by developing its own aircraft radio transceiver.
Not all progress has been restricted to systems engineering.
Research—some performed jointly with other agencies—advanced in the presuppression and fire-detection field.
A spherics (electrical storm) detection and tracking system, aerial infrared fire detection, automatic weather observation and reporting service, and several thermoelectric generating devices were under study.
The spherics tracking system in scheduled to be installed in Alaska in 1965.
As part of the Department of the Interior's far-reaching program of conservation education, a group of school teachers attending a conference in Colorado were taken on a tour of some public lands in the Gunnison River Valley.
Major emphasis in Bureau of Land Management personnel operations was on training and developing top supervisory personnel in leadership and personnel management.
Most BLM State Directors attended the Summer Institute in Executive Development for Federal Administrators at the University of Chicago.
There was a substantial increase in participation by employees at the Montana State University School for Administrative Leadership.
Thirty-four range conservationists took a refresher course at Utah State University.
For the second successive year, two employees attended the University of Michigan, taking courses in Natural Resource Development and Policy Analysis for which they received masters' degrees.
Approximately three times as many employees were trained through interagency and inter-Bureau courses and through private agencies outside the Government.
They took courses in real estate appraisal, fire behavior, supervisory development, trespass, and many other subjects.
One week of orientation on Bureau functions was given 260 new professional employees.
In accordance with the President's Executive Order 10988, Employee-Management Cooperation in the Federal Service, a plan was developed for fully recognizing rights of employees and their organizations.
The Employee Handbook was revised, a comprehensive recruiting pamphlet on Careers in the Bureau of Land Management was published, and a pamphlet on summer employment was issued.
In the field of safety, frequency rate of disabling injuries declined 30 percent.
Similarly, there was a reduction in the frequency of preventable motor vehicle accidents.
The direct cost of all accidents per employee dropped from $45.13 in 1959 to $16.22 in 1962.
Many short training sessions were held in fiscal 1963, and a Safety Handbook was prepared to promote accident prevention.
Emphasis on economic reforms, including land reform, in the United States foreign programs created increased demands for technical assistance from the Bureau of Land Management.
Many of the Bureau's methods in the survey, distribution, and management of land in developing areas can be applied directly, or with modifications, to other countries.
Opportunities were provided for over 60 nationals of 15 countries to investigate the public land policies and programs which have played a major role in the security and development of the United States.
Nine former Bureau cadastral survey, land, and range management officials were on assignment with the Agency for International Development.
Technical consultation in all areas of the BLM's operations was provided nationals of nearly all free world countries.
Appropriations during fiscal 1963 for operations of the Bureau of Land Management were: Management of lands and resources, $44,410,200; construction, $1,000,000; O & C grant lands, $7,703,- 025; range improvements, $696,525; and Public Lands Administration Act, $746,214.
In addition,$6,537,000 was allocated the Bureau under the Accelerated Public Works program.
During the year the Bureau received from the sale and management of public lands and resources a total of $530,692,660.
These came principally from mineral leases and permits; timber sales; sales of public lands and materials; grazing leases, licenses, and permits; fees and commissions; and leasing of rights-of-way.
Receipts of the Bureau of Land Management for fiscal year 1963 were distributed as follows: $209,355 for Indian trust funds; $1,200,000 returned to the grazing districts for range improvements; $4,099,437 transferred to other Government agencies; $55,521,101 deposited to the reclamation fund; $61,051,134 to 27 public land States (of which $15,031,270 went to the 18 western Oregon timberland counties) ; and $408,611,633 to the general fund of the U.S. Treasury.
Receipts of BLM and its predecessor agencies total $3,127,222,- 993.
Since BLM was established in 1946, receipts have totaled $2,390,577,840.
Spiny cholla cactus is one of the picturesque plants found on arid BLM lands of the southwest.
On August 22, 1962, the one billionth visit to the national parks was recorded since the first visit in 1904.
At the current pace, the second billionth will be reached in 11 years.
The National Park System affords Americans opportunities to enjoy great scenic and inspirational areas of their country in a natural, unspoiled condition and the rare quality of the primitive wilderness that was America before it was touched by civilization.
They may better comprehend the physical and spiritual links that bind America's past to its present and future and they may find release from the care and tension of the workaday world.
The supply of outdoor recreational facilities and opportunities is proving inadequate in both number and distribution to meet the increasing demand.
The Nation's burgeoning and mobile population will be hard put to find extensive areas of open space.
But it will be the Federal, State, and local parks that will bear the burden: Several thousand recreation seekers cannot be satisfied in a park designed to accommodate several hundred.
Secretary of the Interior Udall cautioned that "the least we can do . . . before our land patterns become inalterably fixed . . . is to preserve the few remaining extensive areas of natural open space .. . now, while there's still time."
The Service is providing more and better opportunities for Americans to visit, understand, and fully enjoy their great natural, historic, and scientific heritage.
While holding to the traditional concept of preserving wilderness values as completely as possible, the National Park Service, during fiscal 1963, made great strides in modernizing its services to the public.
These improvements are evidenced in better access roads, more trails for hiking and horseback riding, more campgrounds, more and better visitor accommodations, and more modern and imaginative interpretive facilities.
Welcomed a new high of 91,496,000 visitors to the National Park System and recorded 6,106,000 camp-use days—a startling 21-percent gain over fiscal 1962.
Saw three areas established as units of the park system: Petrified Forest National Park, Ariz.
Fort Clatsop National Memorial, Oreg.
The Service also welcomed the authorization of six areas including national seashores at Point Reyes in California and Padre Island, Tex.
New York, Fort Saint Marks, Fla., and the Frederick Douglass Home, a unit of the National Capital Parks.
Cooperated in important special studies of the North Cascades region in Washington State, the Coast Redwoods region in California, and a comprehensive park and recreation area study of Hawaii.
In addition, the Service is also cooperating in a special Wild Rivers Study being conducted jointly by the Departments of Agriculture and Interior.
Saw the long-range requirements program, which began in 1956 with Mission 66, enter a new phase with the assignment of a task force to chart the future course of both the Service and the National Park System.
Received from Congress $13,622,000 to purchase privately owned lands urgently required for recreation, conservation, development, and construction purposes in 24 long-established areas and 7 newly authorized ones.
Accomplished a construction effort in which more than 90 percent of all programed projects either had been completed or were being built.
Highlighted the release of the Secretary's Special Wildlife Advisory Board Report on March 4, 1963, whose wildlife management recommendations were subsequently accepted and implemented in the program.
Opened or installed 9 new visitor centers and installed more than 150 exhibits.
Moved the Horace M. Albright Training Center to newly constructed facilities at Grand Canyon National Park.
Raised to 404 the total number of sites eligible for status in the Registry of National Historic Landmarks.
Increased attention to the equal opportunity program and to the employment of women in types of positions for which they are particularly suited, such as park guides and park interpretors.
Issued an unprecedented number of factual reports and publications to the general public.
Processed, through its Division of International Cooperation, more than 2,000 letters of inquiry from foreign countries.
Recorded more than 7 million visits to units administered by the National Capital Parks.
National Parks registered a total of 91,496,000 visits.
This record figure was an increase of 11.2 percent over fiscal 1962—and more than doubled the volume of park visits of 11 years ago, and tripled the statistics of 15 years back.
National Park Service statisticians forecast that the existing developed parks will experience 100 million visits during the Service's Silver Anniversary year, 1966.
As new recreation areas and seashores are developed, a 1966 figure substantially greater than 100 million may be confidently expected.
The camp-use days—6,106,000 during fiscal 1963—were 21 percent above those recorded during the previous period.
That camping is no longer the nearly exclusive preserve of the family under a canvas tent on the ground emerged from a special survey made during 1962.
It showed that of every 100 camping parties, slightly more than 50 use this equipment.
Nineteen camped in house-trailers, seven in tents erected on trailers, six in campercoaches, six in station wagons or specially equipped buses, three in tiny sleeping trailers, and eight utilized more unusual equipment— or none at all.
Becoming more popular is the use of house trailers as a means of camping.
Nearly all Park System areas provide for the camping families using house trailers.
Park concessioners and private in-holders operating commercial accommodations recorded 2,944,000 overnight stays, or 8.7 percent above fiscal 1962—the largest relative increase in more than a decade.
Three new areas were established and six areas were authorized for addition to the National Park System during the year.
Petrified Forest National Park, Ariz., became the Nation's 31st national park December 9, 1962, when Secretary Udall issued an order redesignating the Petrified Forest National Monument as a national park.
A 1958 act had provided that this be done as soon as the non-Federal holdings, totaling 8,174 acres, were acquired by the Federal Government.
Fort Clatsop National Memorial, Oreg.
The site of a historic fur-trading enterprise located on the mountain route of the Santa Fe Trial in Colorado—Bents Old Fort— was established on March 15, 1963, as Bents Old Fort National Historic Site.
Two national seashores were authorized by Congress in recognizing the need to preserve additional portions of our rapidly vanishing seashore.
They were Point Reyes National Seashore, Calif., authorized September 13, 1962, and Padre Island National Seashore, Tex., authorized September 28, 1962.
Four historic sites were also authorized for inclusion in the National Park System.
They are the Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site and Sagamore Hill National Historic Site, both authorized July 25, 1962, to preserve in Federal ownership these historically significant properties in New York State, which were associated with the life of President Theodore Roosevelt; the Frederick Douglass Home, District of Columbia, authorized September 5, 1962, as a unit of the National Capital Parks, to preserve the home of this noted Negro leader; and Fort Saint Marks National Historic Site, Fla., authorized October 10, 1962, to protect the site where several successive forts were built, starting about 1679.
Park and visitor protection continued to receive the highest priorities in all areas of the National Park System.
Conservation of the unique, natural, and primitive values, together with provision for public recreational enjoyment of the esthetic and historic values by more than 90 million visitors, were enhanced through intensive planning, organization, and development.
Release of the Secretary's Special Wildlife Advisory Board Report, the subsequent acceptance of its recommendations, and implementation of activities highlighted the wildlife management program in the national parks.
A review of current and future national park wildlife programs was prepared so that a stepped-up program of cooperative understanding, study, and management of migratory animals might be resolved through increased contacts with other conservation agencies.
There has been a significant need to preserve park values through increased wildlife management.
These included the establishment of wildlife control programs which, in fiscal 1963, involved relocation of 2,079 large mammals and the necessary reduction of 4,992 animals.
Cooperative fisheries studies continued and fish planting programs were carried out in 13 areas.
The Horace M. Albright Training Center (formerly the National Park Service Training Center) was relocated in new facilities at Grand Canyon National Park, Ariz.
Nearly 300 members of the uniformed staff completed the concentrated 3-month orientation and indoctrination training program.
The Horace M. Albright Training Center was relocated in new facilities at Grand Canyon National Park, Ariz.
Approximately 50 percent of these fires were man caused.
The Service spent $261,029 in fire-suppression activities.
To counter additional fire damage, the Service enjoyed the continuous and effective cooperation of other land-management agencies.
An interdepartmental fire behavior school was held in California.
Control continued against epidemic outbreaks of forest pests in developed and concentrated visitor-use areas.
The program included protection of outstanding or rare plant species and plant communities.
Soil and moisture conservation programs, undertaken to restore depleted or previously misused land, vegetation, and water resources and to restore natural conditions, were conducted in 20 parks.
A conservation survey on 225,000 acres of depleted wildlife range in Yellowstone National Park started.
Cooperative activities with local soil and water conservation districts and other agencies increased.
Nine new visitor centers were opened: Antietam National Battlefield Site, Md.
Pea Ridge National Military Park, Ark.
Chancellorsville Battlefield, Va.
Lehman Caves National Monument, Nev.
Fort Clatsop National Memorial, Oreg.
Petrified Forest National Park, Ariz.
Christiansted National Historic Site, Virgin Islands; Vanderbilt Mansion National Historic Site, N.Y.; and Big Bend National Park, Tex.
Park visitors find exhibits—both in the visitor centers and along the roads and trials—help them understand and enjoy the parks.
Durable, self-operating, accurate, and attractive exhibits afford an economical and effective aid to interpretation.
During the year the Service installed over 150 exhibits in the 9 new visitor centers.
It added, updated, or rehabilitated nearly 100 exhibits in 15 established visitor centers.
At year's .
The Service experimented successfully with new methods of improving the design and durability of outdoor exhibits.
In the process, over 50 new ones were installed in 8 parks.
The heart of good exhibits are the specimens they display.
Park visitors find exhibits in the visitor centers and along the roads and trails help them to understand better and enjoy the parks.
This unique outdoor exhibit at Badlands National Monument, S. Dak., is a glass-enclosed "fossils-in-place" display.
The Service continued to refine its collections by adding significant and necessary new material while disposing of specimens not useful to the parks.
The outstanding accession was Benjamin Franklin's desk, purchased at auction for Independence National Historical Park with the aid of the Eastern National Park and Monument Association.
The Service received numerous gifts of specimens for the American Museum of Immigration, the Museum of Westward Expansion, and for other park museums across the country.
Improvement of opportunities for visitors to understand and enjoy their national parks increased.
Sixteen new naturalist positions were filled during the year.
Two new training programs for improving the quality and effectiveness of performance in interpretive programs were started.
One was the opening of the Stephen T. Mather Interpretive Training and Research Center at Harpers Ferry, W. Va.
Results will be evaluated as a possible continuing training method.
A committee was established to develop and evaluate new ideas and devices for interpretation.
New concession contracts were approved for Yosemite, Blue Ridge Parkway, and National Capital Region, in addition to Independence and Castillo de San Marcos.
A major feature of the new concession contract at Yosemite was a $2 million construction commitment for new and improved visitor accommodations.
Offers were invited for concessions at Flaming Gorge, Glen Canyon, Great Smoky Mountains, and Cape Hatteras.
Important concessioner investments were made at Grand Canyon (South Rim), $388,347; Lake Mead, $134,264; Petrified Forest, $116,038; Sequoia and Kings Canyon, $388,403; Shenandoah, $196,854; Grand Teton, $334,581; Independence, $207,269; Castillo de San Marcos, $245,699; and Yosemite, $622,412.
Additional projects by concessioners were underway or were planned at Blue Ridge, Big Bend, Mammoth Cave, Olympic, and Glen Canyon.
An integrated training program for first- and second-line supervisors was developed and presented.
Also, as a pilot project, students were hired from a 2-year technical school to evaluate education in fields of horticulture, construction, and engineering in terms of our needs and efficient manpower utilization.
The Service believes that such graduates offer great potential to improve personnel.
As the number of visits increases throughout the National Park System, the problems of littering and sanitation removal and disposal costs increase.
During the year, the Park Service, along with the Forest Service, published a litterbug poster for use in all national parks and national forests.
This seeks to develop a cooperative attitude toward keeping such areas clean.
A study was started on disposal methods and practices to be used in national parks.
The Sound and Light programs, started in fiscal 1962 at Independence National Historical Park and Castillo de San Marcos National Monument, were in fulloperation and awaited complete evaluation of public acceptance.
Proposals to extend such service to other areas were held in abeyance pending evaluation.
Studies were completed in 6 basic themes of American history while 93 sites and structures were classified as having exceptional value and were approved as eligible for the Registry of National Historic Landmarks.
They brought the total to 404.
Archeological research was carried out in 22 Service areas.
Major projects were started at Grand Portage, Mound City, and Mount McKinley.
Other projects began or were continued at Hopewell Village, Chalmette, and Mesa Verde.
The National Geographic Society donated another $50,000 for Wetherill Mesa research at Mesa Verde.
Extensive salvage archeology in reservoir areas continued through financial cooperation with other Federal agencies and State and local institutions.
The Smithsonian Institution, with funds from the Service, operated 16 field parties in the Missouri River Basin.
Under cooperative agreements, 41 other reservoir areas were investigated by 27 different institutions.
Valuable scientific information is constantly being gathered by projects in the National Park Service areas and salvage areas.
This is proved by the receipt of 91 research reports on such projects.
The close of fiscal 1963 marked the end of a most successful construction effort of the Office of Design and Construction.
At that time, more than 90 percent of all programed projects either had been completed or were under construction.
Those projects programed, but not underway at that time, were delayed because of unforeseen exigencies such as land acquisition, archeological research, and master plan preparation and approval.
Planning was completed for projects programed for construction during fiscal 1964.
Emphasis was on providing more visitor facilities in established and newly acquired areas.
Some of the more significant projects will provide new or additional facilities to visitor developments in Blue Ridge Parkway, Dinosaur, Wind Cave, Grand Teton, Yellowstone, Big Bend, Saguaro, Zion, Death Valley, Lava Beds, and Sequoia-Kings Canyon; initial development of recently established areas as Fort Davis, Whiskeytown, and Cape Cod National Seashore; and complete programed development in a single year of such areas as Fort Raleigh, Gila Cliff Dwellings, Glacier Bay, Sitka, and Hamilton Grange.
Continuation of longrange construction projects, such as archeological surveys, excavation, and ruins stabilization in Mesa Verde and dune and beach stabilization at Cape Hatteras National Seashore, are also contemplated.
Completion of the Petrified Forest Community by the internationally known architects, Neutra and Alexander, is an example of outstanding environmental architecture.
Faithful adherence to authenticity characterizes the continuing and most satisfactory restoration of buildings in Independence Square.
The substantial contributions of individuals, universities, and municipalities in money, facilities, and drawings has increased the accomplishments of the Historic American Building Survey and the resulting archival material.
The prototype Wisconsin Catalog of historic buildings, designed for visual understanding and of broad interest to both the scholar and the lay public, approached its final stage.
Interest by States and universities could result in a complete 50-State series.
The Division of Construction, responsible for construction policies and contract administration, was created late in the year and is expected to play an important role in the National Park Service.
The Division of Engineering supervised more than 1,600 projects, totaling $41,730,300, in 168 areas in 40 States, the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia.
Of particular significance was participation with the Federal Aviation Agency in constructing public airports in the vicinity of Yellowstone National Park and Grand Canyon National Park (South Rim).
Both airports will become operable during 1964 and will permit scheduled airline service to the parks.
They also will aid in administration and protection of the areas.
A survey was being conducted to determine Service requirements for similar facilities in or near other areas it administers.
Development of recreation facilities at reservoirs in the Upper Colorado River Basin continued.
Visitor facilities, such as campgrounds, picnic grounds, marinas, and boat-launching ramps and utilities systems, are included in the present construction program of 45 projects totaling more than $1,980,181 at Crawford, Flaming Gorge, Glen Canyon, Paonia, Steinaker, and Navajo Reservoir Recreation Areas.
Provision of visitor facilities, including construction of campgrounds and picnic areas, was stressed.
Underway were 376 projects, totaling more than $12 million in 69 areas in 31 States.
They will provide more than 9,000 new campground sites, approximately 2,400 picnic area sites, and the rehabilitation of 945 campground sites.
Included in this total were 96 roads and trails projects, 108 utilities projects, and 27 miscellaneous projects to serve these visitor facilities.
Visitor facilities, including boat-launching ramps and marinas, are part of the construction program of 45 projects.
Water skiing is a popular water sport on Lake Powell now filling above Glen Canyon Dam in the desert country of Utah and northern Arizona.
Storm damage repairs to dunes and beaches in Cape Hatteras National Seashore, and repairs to flood-damaged trails in Sequoia-Kings Canyon were also made.
The Service scheduled 509 projects totaling more than $8,225,056 for miscellaneous construction items in 168 parks, monuments, and recreation areas in 40 States.
More than 300 utilities construction projects totaling $8,527,873 in 114 national park areas, were underway or being readied.
Conversion of National Park Service radio systems to narrow band frequencies was completed or was underway at 15 parks, parkways, monuments, and the National Capital Region.
Installation of new radio systems was completed or started at nine parks and monuments.
Commercial electric powerlines were extended to supply power to the following: Colorado, Jewel Cave, Theodore Roosevelt, Capulin Mountain, Great Sand Dunes, Hovenweep, Death Valley, Mount Rainier, and Olympic.
Construction of a commercial powerline into Death Valley National Monument culminated many years of negotiations.
A $16 million contract authorization for landscaping was distributed as follows: Baltimore-Washington Parkway, $166,100; Blue Ridge Parkway, $6,604,300; Colonial Parkway, $343,200; Foothills Parkway, $86,700; George Washington Memorial Parkway, $1,480,500; Natchez Trace Parkway, $4,185,400; Rock Creek and Potomac Parkways, $2,933,800; and advance planning, $200,000.
Fifteen major projects totaling $10,900,000 were completed.
They included 45 miles of paving, 29 miles of grading, 12 grade separations and bridges, and 1 tunnel.
On the Blue Ridge Parkway, a 20-mile section was opened from Beech Gap to Balsam Gap, where the parkway road reaches its highest elevation, 6,050 feet, at Richland Balsam.
Its opening provides continuous travel west of Asheville from Pisgah Inn through Wagon Road Gap 60 miles to the southern terminus at Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
Thirty-nine contracts totaling approximately $25 million were in progress under the Bureau of Public Roads.
They included 52 miles of paving, 63 miles of grading and base course work, 45 bridges and grade separations, 8 tunnels, and other road-improvement work.
About $4,874,000 worth of construction was concentrated on the final link of the Blue Ridge Parkway in Virginia around the city of Roanoke, and $6,310,000 on the sections west of Asheville between Pisgah Inn and U.S. Highway 25.
Both sections are expected to be ready for the 1965 travel season.
Work started on 41/ miles of the 11-mile section around Asheville.
The Asheville gap and the 51 miles around Grandfather Mountain, for which right-of-way has not been acquired, are the only stretches of the 469-mile parkway not yet started.
Reports prepared by the Bureau of Public Roads and the National Park Service were completed for the Great River Road in Iowa and for Parts I and II in Minnesota, containing recommendations for land acquisition, scenic easement, and control of access.
Studies for similar reports were underway in Arkansas, Wisconsin, and Illinois.
Blue Ridge Extension into North Carolina and Georgia (190 miles).
A favorable report was prepared and submitted to Congress by the Departments of Interior and Commerce.
Allegheny Parkway (550 miles), Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia, and Kentucky.
Field studies started.
The report is scheduled for completion in fiscal 1964.
New River Parkway (99 miles), West Virginia.
Field studies nearly completed and the report to the Area Redevelopment Administration is in preparation.
George Washington Country Parkway (184 miles), Mount Vernon to Yorktown, Va.
Field studies continued.
About $6,850,000 of roadwork was contracted for.
Most of the 75 miles of roadwork completed was reconstruction of existing routes.
Principal jobs completed were at Glacier, Grand Canyon, Crater Lake, and Mount McKinley.
One outstanding section of new road was built as the through scenic highway at Capitol Reef.
A new concept, the “Package Master Plan," was adopted.
It combines into one document all narrative and graphic material necessary to assure continuity in managing and developing a park.
This system involves the simultaneous study by a team of men oriented and experienced in master plan concepts.
They prepare this document in the park in conjunction with the park staff.
This method will help bring master plans up to date and keep them current.
Following adoption of the system in fiscal 1963, five complete master plans were submitted and approved, while numerous others were under preparation.
Among those completed are three for new parks so public use facilities can be provided soon after the areas have been established.
These include Cape Cod, Bents Old Fort, and Fort Davis.
In preparation are those for Hamilton Grange, Lincoln Boyhood, Padre Island, Point Reyes, Sagamore Hill, and Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace.
The planning program seeks the selection for preservation— while still available—of those outstanding scenic, scientific, historic, and recreation areas which are of national significance so that park needs may be fulfilled.
This program is urgent because the cost of the most desirable areas is rapidly increasing and the opportunities to preserve the best remaining areas are diminishing as such areas are taken for industrial, commercial, residential, and other forms of development.
Reports were completed on comprehensive planning studies of 16 major areas suggested for addition in the National Park System, including Big Horn Canyon, Montana-Wyoming.
Significant planning progress was made during the year.
The extensive planning work required to prepare suggestions for legislative consideration continued on 37 proposed projects.
Reports were completed on the comprehensive planning studies of 16 major areas suggested for addition to the National Park System.
Among these were Bighorn Canyon, Mont.-Wyo.
Buffalo River, Ark.
Congaree Swamp, S.C.; Guadalupe Mountains, Tex.
John Muir Home, Calif.
Field investigations of about 30 additional areas were made, in various degrees of detail, to determine whether they were of national significance.
The Department announced its support for establishing the following: Allegheny Portage Railroad National Historic Site, Pa.
Canyonlands National Park, Utah; Fire Island National Seashore, N.Y.; Fort Bowie National Historic Site, Ariz.
Fort Larned National Historic Site, Kans.
Fort Union Trading Post National Historic Site, N. Dak.-Mont.
Great Falls Park (part of George Washington Memorial Parkway), Va.
Hubbell Trading Post National Historic Site, Ariz.
Ice Age National Scientific Reserve, Wis.
Johnstown Flood National Memorial, Pa.
Oregon Dunes National Seashore, Oreg.
Ozark National Rivers, Mo.
Poverty Point National Monument, La.
Prairie National Park, Kans.
Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore, Mich.
In addition, Congress studied establishment of the Boston National Historic Sites, Mass.
Channel Islands National Seashore, Calif.
Chesapeake and Ohio Canal National Historic Park, Md.
Great Basin National Park, Nev.
Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore, Ind.
Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore, Mich.
Saint-Gaudens National Historic Site, N.H.; Tocks Island National Recreation Area, N.J.-Pa.
Congress appropriated $13,622,000 in fiscal 1963 for purchase of privately owned lands urgently required for recreation, conservation, development, and construction purposes in 24 longestablished areas and in 7 newly authorized national park areas to provide public areas for America.
Significant donations of lands and money helped in acquiring land in 15 areas.
One donation was for $500,000.
This will be used to purchase lands in the Virgin Islands National Park.
Exchanges of private lands for Federal lands benefited five areas, and transfers of Federal lands from other Government agencies helped add land to six areas.
Added to the National Park System by various means were 53,919.41 acres of land and water.
Through boundary revisions, 4,196.92 acres were excluded, resulting in a net gain of 49,722.49 acres.
Most of the excluded acreage reverted to the public domain.
Accessions were as follows: Purchased with appropriated funds, 4,533.98 acres; donated, 24,815.17 acres; transferred, 19,710.00 acres; and exchanged, 4,860.26 acres.
Remaining were 673,400 acres of non-Federal lands and waters within national park areas.
Such non-Federal holdings continued as an administrative handicap and prevented complete conservation and full utilization of adjoining Federal lands for public park purposes.
A land-acquisition program started at the new Point Reyes National Seashore, Calif., and land acquisition programs progressed at other recently authorized areas: Fort Smith National Historic Site, Ark.
Lincoln Boyhood National Memorial, Ind.
Mockley Point in Maryland, across the Potomac from Mount Vernon; Minute Man National Historical Park, Mass.
Land-purchase programs were underway at five Civil War sites to consolidate Federal holdings in time for centennial celebrations and for permanent preservation of historic scenes.
At year's end 170 contracts were pending for the purchase of lands in 19 areas of the National Park System.
When completed, they will bring an additional 5,112.48 acres into Federal ownership.
Also pending for title clearance were the gifts of 4,576 acres of land in three areas.
During the year, Congress authorized additions of lands at Capulin Mountain National Monument, N. Mex.
Congress also directed that the Edison Laboratory National Monument and the Edison Home National Historic Site be combined into the Edison National Historic Site, N.J. Congress also changed Harpers Ferry National Monument, W. Va., to Harpers Ferry National Historic Site.
By Presidential proclamations, 5,361 acres were added to Craters of the Moon National Monument, Idaho; 2,882 acres were added to and 3,925 acres deleted from Bandelier National Monument, N. Mex.
Economic research during the year focused on measuring the impact of proposed parks on the basic economic structure of surrounding areas.
An economic study of the proposed Buffalo National River was made by the University of Arkansas.
A similar study was made by Michigan State University of the proposed Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore.
Other completed studies were for the proposed Between-the-Lakes National Recreation Area, by the Tennessee State Planning Board, and for Northeastern Vermont, by the University of Vermont.
An economic study of a proposed national park on the island of Kauai, Hawaii, is being conducted under contract.
The National Park Service is cooperating in a significant study of the North Cascades region of the State of Washington, being conducted jointly by the Interior and Agriculture Departments.
A second important study was being conducted by the Service of the Coast Redwoods region of California, made possible by a grant from the National Geographic Society.
Another special study on recreation was being conducted in Hawaii under contract.
In addition, the Service cooperated in a special Wild Rivers Study by the Departments of Agriculture and Interior.
The long-range requirements program entered a new phase during the year with the assignment of a six-man task force to make plans for the future course of both the National Park System and the National Park Service.
The completed long-range plan, expected to be released in fiscal 1964, will form the basis for shorter range programs to meet constantly changing conditions imposed by natural growth and need.
The plan will develop long-range objectives and guidelines for the management, use, and development of a well-rounded and evenly distributed National Park System.
Such a long-range plan sees as a foremost challenge the impact of rapidly increasing public use on units of the National Park System.
While it took 58 years to reach the one billionth visit, the Service estimates that the second billionth will be reached in 11 years.
Public interest in the National Park System was reflected in an unprecedented demand for reports and publications regarding all areas administered by the National Park Service.
The National Park Service has a large and varied publication program.
Three areas of work are involved: informational folders, student booklets, and books.
In fiscal 1963, the National Park Service printed 17,508,000 folders for 175 areas and 70,000 copies of 4 general informational folders.
Four student booklets were added to a library of over 40 such works.
Four reference or research documents were under preparation.
The public inquiries function of the National Park Service is closely alined with the Service's publishing program.
Each year the number of inquiries for general information increases.
In fiscal 1963, almost 65,000 inquiries were received by letter, telephone, or personal visit.
More than 90 percent of these requests were answered in some way with printed material.
More emphasis was placed on the quality of audiovisual program materials.
Two recording technicians were added to the staff of the Branch of Audiovisual Services to improve the fidelity of Service-recorded material.
New audiovisual program materials created during the year included production of 11 sound-slide film programs for visitor centers and a 16-mm.