During 1963, the Department of Labor entered the second half-century of its service to the Nation.
At the same time, the country was being made aware for the first time of two new revolutions affecting men and work.
For it was in the Department's sist year that the United States first concentrated its attention on the great manpower revolution brought on by rapid technological advancement.
And, in the hot summer of that year, we were all made aware that the struggle for equal rights had suddenly become a struggle for equal opportunities.
The Labor Department was in the forefront of the Government's response to both revolutions.
It strengthened its organizational structure to meet the challenge of the manpower revolution, and prepared the historic First Manpower Report of the President, incorporating the Nation's commitment to the idea that there are to be no human hostages left in the wake of progress.
Administratively, one of the Department's major undertakings in 1963 was the launching of the manpower development and training program—a project of far-reaching social and economic significance for the Nation.
The attention of the Department, in this ist year, became focused more clearly than ever upon the central problem of manpower development, use, and need.
Equipped with the research and training authority of the Manpower Development and Training Act, the Department began, for the first time in the Nation's history, to draw up detailed balance sheets of our manpower sources.
Examination into the causes and nature of continued unemployment, inquiries into the impact of technological change upon the labor force, estimates of the cost of discrimination, assessment of the primary importance of proper education and training in a modern economy—all of the resources of the Department have been brought to bear upon these fundamental considerations.
And as framers of the manpower policies of this Nation, we are challenged to keep pace with the genius of science.
We must bring to the architecture of manpower policy the degrees of invention, the ingenuity, the boldness which characterize today's phenomenal rate of scientific discovery.
We must develop those programs which will safeguard the person who may, as an individual, be adversely affected by a technological development which greatly benefits the community as a whole.
Our task includes the responsibility to persuade, to obtain consent, to overcome the force of inertia represented in men's desire as individuals for even the incomplete security they think the status quo gives them.
Today, a man's job is also the uncertain product of unpredictable but almost certain change.
Within the next 3o days, 5oo,ooo people will move to new employers, 600,000 to a different line of work.
And 400,000 to different areas of the country.
This change will be devastating unless we harness it to our own use.
If we guide change for our benefit, we must first erect an economy capable of enlarging itself, an economy that offers to each man a meaningful use of his time and talent.
I think that in terms of our particular interest in achieving a full-employment economy the largest importance attaches to the stimulation of consumer purchasing power.
Beyond that, we can and must do better in approaching the problems of technology.
Attention must be given in the private processes of collective bargaining to the problems presented by automation.
We are going to have to review our seniority systems, our training and retraining activities, our employment security programs, and our retirement plans to find ways of assuring that a man's rights are not destroyed when he has to move aside for a machine.
Only part of this job can be done privately.
The rest of the answer to it is illustrated by the enactment by Congress of such legislation as the Manpower Development and Training Act.
Under this legislation we will undertake to train some 400,o0o people in the next 3 years.
We are going to need in this decade alone 5 million more skilled workers than are presently available.
It is important that we identify today the types of jobs that these skilled workers will fill so that we can plan for the future.
Retraining must be devised on a basis of working back from such knowledge and I am sure we can gear the retraining program to previously identifiable job opportunities.
The real answer to the change that is upon us is that nothing will make sense unless we expand the economy to the point where there are another 4 million jobs.
We have vast unmet needs in this country.
Our real wealth in meeting them is the use of the full potential of each individual who wants to work.
When we accomplish this, then we will meet these problems.
Retraining is important in doing that and so are many other factors, but we must move the economy on to a faster employment pace.
The vantage of 1963—the Department's 5oth anniversary—is the best one irom which to consider this central challenge of continuing change.
We do not face a world war, as we have done twice in the past.
We do not face the collapse of an entire economic system, as we once did.
We face, rather, the product of success—an economy so dynamic in its technical ability that it has outstripped the skills of millions, depriving itself in the process of that many consumers.
As in the earlier periods, the Department will be able to make a contribution to this problem because the individual remains its central concern.
In order to cope more effectively with the mounting problems of manpower, the Manpower Administration was created in February 1963.
This vital new organization consists of the Bureau of Employment Security, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, and the Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training.
In compliance with provisions of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, BES took several positive measures.
It developed specifications for regulations and agreements and issued operational procedures as guides to State agencies.
BES also initiated trade adjustment allowance notices to inform State agencies of industry, firm, and worker petitions filed with the U.S. Tariff Commission as well as findings of petitions handled by the Commission.
A great deal of additional action was taken by the Department in 1963 in the manpower field.
The Department's Office of the Solicitor, for example, assisted in drafting three major pieces of legislation affecting manpower that were enacted during the year—the Equal Pay Act, the Trade Expansion Act, and amendments to the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act.
In fiscal r963, public employment offices attained their highest jobplacement level since World War II, placing 6.6 million nonagricultural workers—2 percent above 1962's record figure.
The Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training executed in March its first contract for an on-the-job training program.
By June, 42 contracts, providing for the training of 1,627 persons in 117 occupations, had been approved.
Some 30,ooo unemployed and underemployed workers were enrolled in institutional and on-the-job training courses under the auspices of the Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training.
These courses were tailored to equip trainees with labor market skills currently in demand.
Nine thousand persons were enrolled under the Area Redevelopment Act and more than 3o,ooo under the Manpower Development and Training Act.
Counseling services for youth, women, and older workers were implemented in employment centers, and a special placement and counseling service for school dropouts was set up.
The Bureau of Employment Security modernized the processing of data and created a telecommunication network for a nationwide interchange of labor supply and demand information.
Training projects were approved for 6o,ooo persons in 49 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
Intensive research was made on the characteristics of the potential and actual trainees, and youth problems were dealt with by 18 contracts signed during the year.
The Department worked effectively for equal job opportunities through the example of its own employment policies, the democratic standards of its apprenticeship programs, and the power of its influence.
It stressed the necessity of making available more job opportunities for all, in order to provide equal job opportunities for those to whom they had been denied.
Its definitive actions in this field were concentrated to a largedegree on furthering employment opportunities of persons from minority groups.
Stateemployment services, for example, are now required to refer applicants on a nondiscriminatory basis.
Clearly prohibited are the segregation of applicants and reference to race on records and job-acceptance orders.
The Department sponsored conferences to promote the employment of Negro college graduates.
Presidents and deans of Negro colleges participated in the national and regional gatherings, which also considered possible revisions of curricula.
Finally, the Department achieved a good record in regard to equal opportunities for its own employees.
Its personnel rolls showed a 1oo percent increase in the number of nonwhites holding managerial and professional staff positions.
An excellent record in the enforcement of laws affecting millions of American wage earners—really the entire economy—was compiled in 1963.
A new enforcement mark was set when1,6o7 cases were adjudicated and $2 million in back wages recovered under the Fair Labor Standards Act and Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Determinations under the Davis-Bacon Act also reached a new high, and bonding provisions of the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act were implemented.
The activities of the Bureau of Labor-Management Reports, in its fourth year of existence, were marked by an increase in civil and criminal prosecutions under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act.
The number of violations reaching litigation almost doubled—rising from 76 in 1962 to 147 in 1963.
BLMR also entered into a new field activity in fiscal 1963 by conducting 104 investigations delegated to it by the Department's Office of Welfare and Pension Plans under the amended WPPDA.
Marking the 25th anniversary of the enactment of the Fair Labor Standards Act and the first tull year of enforcement of the 1961 amendments which extended coverage to certain large enterprises engaged in or producing goods for commerce, 1963 also witnessed the largest back-wage disclosures made in enforcement history.
More than $49 million was owed to 312,o0o employees, with $19 million representing unpaid minimum wages and the remainder overtime compensation.
Employers agreed to pay more than $zo million to 176,ooo underpaid employees as a result of WHPC investigations.
In addition, investigations of child labor violations revealed that over 10,00o children were illegally employed in nonagricultural work and about 7,000 on farms.
Under the Secretary of Labor's new enforcement powers stemming from the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act, the Office of Welfare and Pension Plans opened cases involving 632 possible civil violations.
BLMR's field staff assisted in disposing of 304 alleged violations.
Executive Order 1o988 which concerns employee-management relations in the Federal service.
In addition, 29,771 cases—nearly 1,ooo more than the figure for the previous year—were compensated under the Federal workmen's compensation programs.
The program for decentralizing adjudication and servicing claims arising under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act was completed, with 135,o0o cases being serviced.
In international labor affairs, 1963 featured completion of the interagency agreement calling for increased departmental participation in the planning and implementation of the Agency for International Development's overseas program.
Eight new labor attaché posts were established and there was a strengthening of programs involving trade union work and visits to the United States of foreign trade unionists.
A total of 173 foreign visitors were programed, with another 553 being referred from other agencies and organizations.
A large share of the activity in the Department's Women's Bureau was centered around intensive efforts to establish the principle of equal pay for men and women who do the same or comparable work.
The Bureau had long been interested in this program, and was relied upon heavily to supply data.
Efforts of all concerned to secure legislative action culminated in the adoption of the Equal Pay Act of 1963, signed by the President on June 1o.
Work of the President's Commission on the Status of Women added new dimensions and responsibilities to current programs.
Efforts were intensified to investigate and alleviate the conditions of women from low-waged, disadvantaged groups.
New studies, for example, were undertaken in response to demands to include in the Bureau's list of publications "Negro Women in 196o" and "Job Horizons for College Women in the 196o's."
In respect to workers' health considerations, the Bureau of Labor Standards took many effective measures.
For example, the Bureau initiated organizational work—as directed by the President—to set up in 1964 the Conference on Occupational Safety.
Also, an analysis was made of 3,3oo bills concerning labor standards from legislatures of 47 States and Puerto Rico, and a study was launched aimed at improving State administration of problems regarding ionizing radiation in workmen's compensation.
Finally, there was an intensification of the program of safety training for State and Federal personnel, and encouraging progress was noted in reducing injury rates in longshoring and ship repair.
The concerted and active efforts of the Department and other governmental agencies concerned with the labor-management area contributed in 1963 to the greatest period of industrial peace the Nation has enjoyed since the end of World War II.
The ratio of time worked to time lost dropped to the second lowest level for a comparable period in postwar years in the first 6 months of 1963.
Another outstanding record was set by major collective bargaining agreements which covered some 2 million workers in the first part of the year.
The majority of these laborers received wage increases averaging 3.5 percent.
Missile sites showed only one man-day lost due tolabor disputes for every 1,288 man-days worked; as a result, 99.92 percent of all available work time on missile sites was used to ready the sites on schedule to receive weapons and crews.
Furthermore, a program aimed at an ultimate goal of reducing the number of the Department's buildings in the Washington area from 2o to a single structure was developed and proposed to Congress.
So, in moving into its second half-century of service, the Department embarked on a striking new era.
The two revolutions of this 5ist year signify the advent of a period when the country will be occupied to an unprecedented extent with the area of responsibility Congress has charged to this Department—"the welfare of the wage earners of the United States."
This 5ist annual report makes it clear that the Department of Labor entered this period of added responsibilities in a condition of preparedness and strength.
In its organization, its personnel and its morale, the Department is fully prepared to discharge its duties with efficiency and dedication.
We face the challenge of the future with confidence and pride.
The Administrative Assistant Secretary is the principal administrative official of the Department.
He is responsible for the budgetary and financial, personnel, and administrative management; program analysis and evaluation; organization of the Department; provision of administrative services; and administration of the Department of Labor Library.
He is assisted by a Deputy Administrative Assistant Secretary, who serves as the Department's budget officer and comptroller, and by an Assistant Administrative Assistant Secretary, who serves as director of personnel.
All major relationships outside the Department on administrative and management matters are developed and maintained by the Administrative Assistant Secretary.
He also coordinates contacts with the Bureau of the Budget and the Congress, except for those involving substantive legislation.
The Office of Budget Administration and the Office of Financial Manage• ment were established in fiscal year 1963 to assist the Deputy Administrative Assistant Secretary in his role as comptroller and chief budget officer.
The Office of Budget Administration provides policy, technical, and overall administrative guidance to all bureaus and offices of the Department on budget formulation, presentation, and execution.
The Office of Financial Management provides policy and technical guidance, and furnishes centralized accounting, payroll, and other financial management services to the bureaus and offices.
Appropriations and other authorizations for the Department of Labor for fiscal year 1963 totaled $777 million and provided for about 9,ooo positions.
Of this amount, $146 million was for salaries and expenses,¹ $216 million for unemployment compensation for Federal employees and ex-servicemen and injured Federal employees' claims and expenses, and $414 million from trust fund authorizations (including $4oo million for grants to States for administrative costs of the employment compensation programs).
Included in these figures are supplemental appropriations made for salary increases granted by Public Law 87-793 and other supplementals for the unemployment compensation fund for Federal employees and ex-servicemen ($22 million), the employed compensation and claims fund ($3,15o,o0o), and the trade adjustment activities function ($1oo,o0o).
The Department began development and operation of an aggressive program for the full and appropriate utilization of employee skills and abilities and the improvement of employee performance and morale.
One of the first steps was the development and operation of a departmentwide career counseling and development program for nonprofessional employees.
The program provides testing and career counseling services for all nonprofessional employees of the Department who request them.
Counseling services and assistance are also provided to employees and supervisors in connection with a wide variety of problems which tend to affect employee performance adversely.
Formal or exclusive recognition was granted to io employee unions, representing over one-half of the Department's employees.
Two agreements were negotiated with the union that represents most of the Department's Washington staff.
A series of conferences was held, both in Washington and in the Department's regional offices, to familiarize executive and supervisory personnel with the objectives of this program.
Thus, the year saw major steps taken toward the implementation of the program envisioned by the President's order on employee-management cooperation.
A departmentwide program of training was undertaken to improve supervision.
Under this program, supervisors were given 4o hours of instruction and practice in dealing with problems arising in the employeesupervisor relationship.
Other significant training activities included office practices refresher training to improve stenographic, typing, and secretarial skills, and assigning of executive and management officials to seminars in operations research, automatic data processing, and other management subjects.
Continuing its efforts to anticipate and meet future needs for high quality managerial ability, the Department widened its program of recruiting from the Federal service entrance examination and the management intern examination.
A positive effort was made to bring these examinations to the attention of minority groups.
The Department also extended its stenographer recruiting activities under a new civil service authority which enabled it to offer career-conditional appointments to eligibles tested in the field.
Nearly 1,2oo students were tested by the Department at 7o high schools and 6 colleges in Virginia, Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and North Carolina.
Approximately 6oo candidates attained eligible standing, and from these the Department was able to fill all existing stenographer and typist vacancies.
The total of new employees in grades GS-1 through GS-1o was 2,641.
The Department of Labor Board of U.S. Civil Service Examiners announced examinations and established or maintained the following registers: Labor economist, employment service adviser, social administration adviser, social insurance research analyst, apprenticeship and training representative, maritime safety officer and assistant, and State veterans employment representative.
This involved evaluating over 2,ooo applications and answering over 4,000 inquiries.
The Department's "Employee Handbook" was revised and reissued in expanded, looseleaf form, and furnished to all employees and persons entering on duty.
Employees were given counsel and assistance on many subjects, such as retirement, employees' compensation, life insurance, health benefits, personal finances, and housing.
Department offered inoculations against influenza, polio, and tetanus; tested for diabetes and glaucoma; and arranged health maintenance examinations given by the Public Health Service.
New directives were developed and released for (x) evaluating employee performance in connection with the granting of within-grade increases, (2) preventing conflicts of interest on the part of advisers and consultants, and (3) setting pay rates for consultants and experts.
Revisions of policy and procedural directives were made in the areas of equal employment opportunity, position classification, administration of adverse actions, ethics and conduct, personnel security, transfers to public international organizations, and protection of the employment and pay status of employees whose service is interrupted by military duty.
Position classification activity continued at a high level as post-staffing reviews of new organizations became necessary, major bureaus were reorganized, and the Manpower Administration was formed.
Over 16,ooo personnel actions were processed.
A major reorganization of the Department's manpower activities was carried out during the year.
A Manpower Administration, headed by the Under Secretary as Manpower Administrator, was established to direct and coordinate the manpower activities of the Department.
The Manpower Administrator has responsibility for the Department's manpower programs and activities.
He is assisted by two Deputy Manpower Administrators, three Assistant Manpower Administrators, and other officials in carrying out a comprehensive manpower program, which includes research, development, distribution, utilization, administration, and program support.
Labor-management programs and operations were reviewed, including those under the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act and the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act.
Particular emphasis was placed upon exploring the benefits which might accrue from realigning these programs and activities under a Labor-Management Services Administration.
Underway was a review of the Department's systems, procedures, and methods in determining, allocating, and utilizing manpower resources.
This was being done by a joint review team comprised of representatives of the Bureau of the Budget, the Civil Service Commission, and the Department of Labor.
It is expected that the review will aid in improving practices for the management, development, and utilization of personnel.
A departmentwide management appraisal and standards project on paperwork management programs and activities was initiated late in the fiscal vear, with the assistance of the National Archives andRecords Service, General Services Administration.
The project is designed to (1) appraise existing policies, programs, and systems for management of paperwork, (2) formulate minimum standards as necessary to insure efficient and economical paperwork management, and (3) provide technical advice, training, and assistance to bureaus and offices, as necessary, to implement the standards.
Initiated during the year was a study to examine departmental and bureau policies and practices in providing administrative management services to field organizations.
A project was undertaken for the development of a departmentwide program planning and review system which would provide top staff of the Department with data essential to the development, guidance, and control of programs.
A survey was made of personnel management programs and operations throughout the Department.
Among the recommendations under consideration was the delegation of greater authority to bureau and office heads and to regional directors in the field of personnel management operations.
A departmentwide test was conducted to determine the benefits and economies that could be derived by using Government-owned motor vehicles in lieu of privately owned vehicles for the performance of official duties.
It is estimated that more than $roo,ooo can be conserved annually by wider participation in the GSA Motor Pool System.
The Department is negotiating with GSA for the assignment of approximately 35o motor pool vehicles during fiscal year 1964.
A review was initiated of all youth activities of the Department, for the purpose of developing improved means for the organization, direction, and coordination of the Department's total youth program.
Technical assistance in the areas of organization planning and procedural development was provided in conjunction with the proposed Youth Employment Act.
The Department instituted a system which utilizes automatic data processing equipment in personnel recordkeeping and statistical reporting.
The system produces many required Civil Service Commission reports on ADP equipment as a byproduct of the day-to-day processing of personnel actions.
In addition, the system provides up-to-date staffing lists which are an essential component of the Department's evolving comprehensive management reporting system.
A project was initiated for the development of a departmentwide manpower control system.
A requirements survey was conducted of the organization and administrative procedures necessary for implementing the Department's responsibilities under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
It was concluded that major functions associated with carrying out the legislation could be assigned to existing organizational components in the Department, and that new organizational components would not be necessary in the immediate future.
Technical assistance was provided in drafting and issuing orders, regulations, and procedures to carry out the trade agreement, tariff adjustment, and worker adjustment assistance responsibilities of the Department.
There was a large increase in all Library activities.
The total circulation was 8o,369, a gain of more than 32 percent over the previous year.
Over 6,10o reference questions were answered, an increase of over 38 percent.
Volumes cataloged totaled 12,612, a gain of more than 23 percent.
Three hundred and ninety-seven volumes were withdrawn from the collection.
The net increase was 12,215, raising the total to more than 425,000 cataloged volumes.
In all, 14,495 new cards were added to the catalog, an increase of 43 percent over the previous year.
A small reference unit was established in the William Building in Silver Spring, and a collection of books and pamphlets and Library services were provided to the manpower seminar which is administered by the Bureau of International Labor Affairs for officials of underdeveloped countries.
The chronic space shortage of fiscal year 1962 carried over into fiscal year 1963 and continued to be one of the Department's most pressing administrative problems.
Departmental operations were housed in over 2o widely separated buildings in the District of Columbia metropolitan area.
As in the previous year, this scattering of operations created communications difficulties and other administrative hardships.
Work was centered on a plan to reduce the total number of locations and simultaneously consolidate each major organizational segment into one building along with other functionally related organizations, as space permitted.
To this end, the Bureau of Labor Standards was consolidated in one building and a plan was devised for (r) consolidating the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training, and the United States Employment Service of the Bureau of Employment Security in one building; (2) consolidating the Bureau of Labor Statistics, including its Division of Data Processing, in a second building; and (3) effecting other improvements by way of relocating certain operations to create more efficient and homogeneous organizational groupings of personnel and functions.
To achieve the above and simultaneously meet most of its unmet space requirements, the Department requested the General Services Administration to assign approximately 1o5,o0o square feet of new office space in one building in the downtown area.
The space was expected to be available for occupancy in October 1963.
In addition to meeting most of its immediate needs, the space would enable the Department to reduce its total number of locations.
On a longer range basis, and in recognition of the Department's chronic space problems, the General Services Administration initiated action to obtain congressional approval for construction of a new building in the District of Columbia capable of housing the entire Department of Labor headquarters operation.
The new Employment Security Building at 6th Street between Pennsylvania Avenue and C Street NW.
Occupancy in August 1963 was assured.
The building will house the United States Employment Service for the District of Columbia and the District of Columbia Unemployment Compensation Board.
Considerable emphasis was placed on plans to consolidate space holdings in cities where departmental regional operations are located, and to upgrade substandard or marginal space.
Arrangements were made to consolidate all departmental regional operations in Kansas City, Mo., in one building and similar operations in Atlanta, Ga., into two adjacent buildings.
Action was initiated to obtain or upgrade space in other cities, including Chicago, Ill., and work will be continued during the forthcoming fiscal year on further space consolidations in other cities housing departmental regional operations.
OAAS data processing activities were devoted primarily during the year to transferring bureau and office payrolls to machine operations.
A new program was initiated that accommodates the personnel records of all employees of the Department and provides improved statistical reporting on personnel matters plus preparation of departmentwide staffing patterns and merit staffing reports.
Also of significance was a decision to select a disk computer system for installation in December 1963.
The decision was based on a comprehensive study by OAAS personnel.
The new system is expected to meet efficiently and effectively the increasing need for faster and more expanded centralized data processing services.
The reproduction of eight recurring publications was transferred to the Government Printing Office.
The resulting reduction of approximately 29 million reproduction impressions should materially assist the Department's central reproduction facilities in handling the increasing amount of work requested by departmental activities.
As with other administrative services, the increasing number of departmental organizations, reflecting the increasing program responsibilities of the Department, has had a serious impact on the Department's central reproduction facilities.
Requisitions for services increased from 13,934 for fiscal year 1962 to 22,065 for fiscal year 1963, and while reproduction units decreased from 1o5.7 million to 79.9 million, the total number of pages submitted for reproduction increased from 121,100 to 190,000, thereby indicating that a larger number of"short run" type jobs were being received.
Considerable attention was given during the year to staffing changes and procedural improvements needed because of the changing workload.
However, additional personnel were not added and an improved scheduling and control system was installed with provision for a central point for information on jobs in progress.
The transfer of blank forms, publications, and supplies, previously located on several floors in four different buildings, was completed during the year and a centralized unit of storage and distribution was inaugurated.
A considerable amount of storage space was converted to office space in two of the Department's principal buildings.
Consolidation of the storage and distribution operations opened the way for initiation of a plan to relocate printing and reproduction operations in the Main Labor Building basement to bring about better functional alignment, improved operations, and operating economies; relocation of conference rooms from other floors of the Main Labor Building in order to release space for office use; expansion and improvement of the Secretary's dining room, officials' dining room, and the stand operated by the Washington Society for the Blind; plus general upgrading of all space in the Main Labor Building basement.
As of June 30, 1963, the architectural and engineering plans for the Main Labor Building alteration project were in the prefinal specification preparation stage, and actual renovation work was expected to be initiated in December 1963.
Related to the above was the completion of an exhibit hall in space adjoining the Main Labor Building basement to house a permanent Department of Labor Museum.
The museum was opened in March 1963 as part of the Department's 5oth anniversary celebration.
Telephone service for the Silver Spring offices of the Department was consolidated with the main switchboard through dial satellite equipment in November 1962.
One additional office was established during the year in Cleveland, Ohio, bringing the total of these offices to five.
Offices were previously established in Boston, Chicago, New York, and San Francisco.
A total of 1,845 field personnel in 216 offices are serviced from these central service offices.
Plans were completed for the establishment of RASO activities in Atlanta and Kansas City during fiscal year 1964, and plans were in the developmental stage for the expansion of services performed at all RASO locations which are expected to result in more efficient and economic operations, better utilization of manpower and equipment, and the provision of additional timely services.
Fiscal year 1963 marked the soth anniversary of the U.S. Department of Labor, established by act of Congress, March 4, 1913.
The Office of Information, Publications, and Reports joined in the Department's anniversary celebration and contributed to its success with three anniversary publications on labor in America and the Department's development: "Challenge and Change," "The Anvil and the Plow," and "Labor in America."
An added attraction of the observance was the establishment of the U.S. Department of Labor Museum, which exhibits visual displays on outstanding developments in labor.
Created by the Office, the museum will become a permanent feature of the Department.
In keeping with its primary function—to inform the public of the work of the Department, its publications, facts compiled by its various bureaus and offices, and laws enacted—the Office issued news releases and replied to some 15o,ooo inquiries from labor, business, and the public.
The Office, headed by a Director, serves as chief coordinator between the Department and the press, radio, television, and other public information media, including approximately 550 labor and 3,00o weekly newspapers.
The Office reviewed publications issued by the various bureaus and offices of the Department for consistency with Department policy.
It compiled and edited publications of departmentwide significance, and prepared exhibits on labor and economic matters.
The Office's visual services division participated in the anniversary celebration with the designing, construction, and processing of 6oo posters, 15 portable exhibits, and 3 large backdrops.
Art work and designs for the Office's anniversary publications were contributed by the visual services division, which also provided art work and designs for 42 bureau and departmental publications of varied types and constructed 6o new portable exhibits and 15 large exhibits for the Department.
Through a silk-screening reproduction process, the division prepared approximately 3,5oo posters, training charts, and mailing pieces.
The photographic section processed approximately 3o,ooo prints and color slides.
To aid in the understanding of the Department and its work, Office staff participated in major State, national, and international conferences and conventions sponsored by labor unions and business and professional organizations.
The displacement of workers by automation, the pressing need for job training and retraining, and the special problemns of youth and minority groups were matters of particular concern to the Department during fiscal year 1963.
The Solicitor, as the chief legal officer of the Department as well as a policy official and adviser, is responsible for the legal aspects of the Depurtment's activities in these areas.
He advises the Secretary, the Under Secretary, and the Assistant Secretaries, and also performs many diversified types of legal services which are required in the operations of the various bureaus and offices of the Department.
One of the more significant areas of his responsibility is the handling of legal proceedings arising under laws administered and enforced by the Department.
He also serves as top legal adviser to the Secretary in formulating and preparing the Department's legislative programs, and in appearances before congressional committees.
In addition to these functions, the Solicitor is authorized to perform operating functions in connection with the administration and enforcement of the Davis-Bacon Act and other statutes relating to the predetermination and payment of prevailing wages on Federal and federally financed and assisted construction projects.
During the year, he testified at length before a House special labor subcommittee on the administration of these laws.
The Solicitor is also vested with final authority with respect to tort claims arising out of the Department's activities.
The reorganization of the Solicitor's Office during the past year—aimed primarily at developing a more closely coordinated staff, with more opportunity for diversification of work assignments—resulted in the consolidation of the eight divisions of the Office into five.
The new arrangement merges the General Interpretative Services Division and the Division of Manpower and Employment Security into a Division of Interpretations and Opinions.
The Litigation Division now performs the functions of three former divisions: Trial Litigation and Administrative Legal Services, Supreme Court and Appellate Litigation, and Employees' Compensation.
The other three divisions are Legislation, Labor-Management Laws, and Wage Determinations.
The immediate Office of the Solicitor is composed of the Solicitor, his Deputy, and several attorneys as special assistants assigned to the handling of special legal problems.
In addition to the Washington office, a staff of attorneys is maintained in field offices throughout the United States and Puerto Rico, principally to carry out the litigation responsibilities of the Department.
This Division, created during the year by the merger of the Divisions of Trial Litigation and Administrative Legal Services, Supreme Court and Appellate Litigation, and Employees' Compensation, is charged mainly with the Department's litigation and quasi-litigation responsibilities.
These functions are performed chiefly in connection with the enforcement of wage-hour legislation (Fair Labor Standards Act and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act), workmen's compensation legislation (Federal Employees' Compensation Act, the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, the District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Act, and related statutes), and maritime safety legislation (Public Law 85-742, 72 Stat. 835).
A record number of cases, 1,6o7, were instituted this year under the Fair Labor Standards Act and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Of these, 1,469 were civil actions (1,219 contested and 250 for consent orders).
It was necessary to bring 4o contempt proceedings to enforce injunctions previously obtained.
Forty-eight criminal prosecutions were instituted, resulting in fines totaling $132,812.
Thirty-six administrative enforcement proceedings were brought under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Over 1,5oo cases of all types were completed during the year.
More than $2,ooo,ooo in back wages was recovered for several thousand employees as a result of litigation activity—$288,ooo under the Walsh-Healey Act and the balance under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Most of these sums were recovered in 14o contested injunction cases in which monetary relief was sought on behalf of underpaid employees as authorized by the 196r amendment to the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The number of such cases shows an upward trend.
During the fiscal year, 42 briefs were filed in appellate proceedings—40 under the Fair Labor Standards Act and 2 under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Of these, two were filed in the Supreme Court in opposition to petitions for writ of certiorari and the rest in the U.S. courts of appeals.
Twenty-one appellate decisions were rendered under these statutes.
The Department's position was upheld in 16 and rejected in 3.
In the remaining two, the Department was successful in part.
As usual, most of the FLSA appeals were concerned with questions of coverage and exemption.
Among the more important cases on the act's coverage was Bear Creek Mining Co. v. Wirtz, 317 F. 2d 67 (C.A. 1), in which the act was held to cover prospecting operations for a large copper company, despite uncertainty as to whether any ore would ever be found or produced, and the many years that might elapse before actual mining could be started, if ever.
The court found "that exploration of new sources of supply is normally a continuing need" of the mining industry and is for that reason "closely related" and "directly essential" to the production of ore within the meaning of the act.
In another case, Wirtz v. Nello L. Teer Co., 314 F. 2d 759 (C.A. 4), the act was held to cover the construction of a diversion channel, built as part of a concededly covered dam and reservoir project, but chosen over other alternatives in order to prevent the main project from flooding local college lands.
The court ruled that, whatever the reason for choosing a particular submersion pattern, one or another pattern was necessary for the completion of the overall project and the alternative chosen therefore shared in the covered status of the overall project.
The act was held to extend also to a night watchman employed on a project for construction of a city street carrying a substantial amount of interstate traffic, in Goldberg v. P L Equipment Co., 311 F. 2d 88 (C.A. 5); and in Willmark Service System, Inc. v. Wirtz, 317 F. 2d 486 (C.A. 8), it was held to extend to the employees of a"shopping service" with a nationwide clientele—specifically the "shoppers" employed in branch offices who visited the local retail shops of their employer's customers to check on the honesty and efficiency of the sales clerks, and sent their reports to the employer's out-of-State main office.
A number of the act's exemption provisions were the subject of judicial interpretation.
In the Willmark decision, the retail exemption was held not to apply to the "shopping service" since Congress by the 1949 amendment "had no intention to broaden the fields of business enterprise to which the exemption would apply" and "Willmark, rather obviously, does not qualify as an establishment 'plainly and unmistakably' within the terms and spirit" of the exemption.
In Wirtz v. DuMont, 309 F. 2d 152 (C.A. 4), the claim of an auto wrecker to be within the retail exemption was rejected on the ground that his sales of salvaged automobile parts to repair shops were "sales for resale" within the meaning of the act.
In Wirtz v. Atlanta Life Insurance Co., 311 F. 2d 646 (C.A. 6), the exemption for outside salesmen was held not to apply to insurance supervisors who spent more than 2o percent of their workweek in routine office work not connected with their own outside sales, even though they spent most of their time accompanying their salesmen on outside duty.
The agricultural exemption was held, in Wirtz v. Jackson Perkins Company, 312 F. 2d 48 (C.A. 2), to apply to the storage employees of a nursery distributor when handling stock grown on the employer's own farms, however distant, or on the farms of the employer's wholly owned subsidiaries, or when handling stock acquired by emergency purchases to meet temporary shortages, but not when handling stock purchased by the employer from contract growers.
The exemption in section 7(c) for the first processing of dairy products was held, in Yogurt Master, Inc. v. Goldberg, 31o F. 2d 53 (C.A. 5), certiorari denied 372 U.S. 972, not to apply to the manufacture of dairy products from concentrated skim milk, since concentrated skim milk is itself a processed product.
The question of compensable worktime was again in issue in two cases.
In Aeromotive Metal Products, Inc. v. Wirtz, 312 F. 2d 728 (C.A. 9), a 15- minute rest period was held to be compensable even though the employees were free to spend this period in such activities as they might desire and the interruption had not in fact increased production or reduced absenteeism.
The court of appeals ruled that since the time was involuntarily spent at or near the plant and that since the rest period of such short duration was not under such conditions as would permit the employees to make beneficial personal use of this time," the trial court had properly concluded that the interruption of work was predominantly for the benefit of the employer. Similarly, in the Willmark case discussed above, frequent but irregular intervals of idle time spent by the‘shoppers" between assignments were held to be compensable on the ground that such so-called"free time" forced on the employees during their workdays was "fortuitous and of no use or benefit" to the employees.
In another case, it was held that employees are entitled to compensation in accordance with the requirements of the act even if there is an understanding that pay is at the discretion of the owner of the business.
The court ruled, in Wirtz v. Leonard, 317 F. 2d 768 (C.A. 5), that "the crucial question is not whether the work was voluntary, but rather whether the [claimant] was in fact performing services for the benefit of the employer with the knowledge and approval of the employer .
A procedural point of considerable importance in the enforcement of the FLSA was determined in Wirtz v. B.A.C. Steel Products, Inc., 312 F. 2d 14 (C.A. 4).
It was held in that case that the defendant employer was not entitled in pre-trial proceedings to have the Secretary produce the statements given by employees or former employees to the Department's investigators.
The decision stressed that the "average employee involved in this type of action is keenly aware of his dependence upon his employer's good will" and concluded that "only by preserving their anonymity can the government obtain the information necessary to implement the law properly."
There were two appellate decisions under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
While that statute refers to Government contracts for the "furnishing of materials, supplies, articles, and equipment," it was held, in United States v. Stocks Lincoln-Mercury, 307 F. 2d 266 (C.A. 10), to be applicable to a contract for the furnishing of both materials and services, where the charges made for the materials were substantially greater than those for the services.
In the same case, the court ruled that it was no defense that the employer had relied on a contrary opinion of a Department field supervisor.
It held that only the opinion of the Secretary or the Wage-Hour Administrator can have protective effect under the Portal-to-Portal Act.
In a second case under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, United States v. New England Coal Coke Co., 16 WH Cases 11 (C.A. 1), it was held that a regular dealer is not responsible for compliance with the act by his suppliers, where the supplies (coal) were not delivered directly to the Government, but were sent to and commingled with the regular dealer's general stockpile from which deliveries were made to other customers as well as to the Government.
In the area of employees' compensation, the principal function of the Division is to render legal services to the Bureau of Employees' Compensation in the administration of the several Federal workmen's compensation statutes.
These statutes provide benefits to employees and their families in the event of injury or death occurring in the performance of duty.
Approximately 3½ million workers are covered—2½ million employees of the Federal Government and i million employees in private enterprise, of whom 300,ooo are private employees in the District of Columbia and 350,00o are longshoremen, ship repairmen, and other maritime workers.
The claims of the Federal employees are governed by the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
In this program, the Division defends the administrative decisions of the Bureau in appeals taken by the claimants to the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board.
The Division participated in 31o such appeals in the fiscal year.
With respect to claims of other employees, under the several Federal compensation statutes, the Division, in conjunction with the Department of Justice, defends the administrative adjudications of the BEC Deputy Commissioners when these decisions are challenged in the courts by either party.
The Division participated in 61 such suits in the fiscal year.
Significant court decisions obtained in this field follow.
1. The Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act was held to cover an injury sustained by an employee while working on land beneath a vessel drawn up on a marine railway for repairs.
Holland v. Harrison Brothers Dry Dock and Repair Yard, Inc., 306 F. 2d 369 (C.A. 5).
2. An employee's injury, incurred while on the way home to continue his work there, was held to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment, where the employer knew that the claimant's duties required him to work after hours.
American Mercury Insurance Co. v. Theodore Britton, 314 F. 2d 285 (C.A.D.C.).
3. In the case of an employee found dead at the top of a stairway at the construction site where he worked, it was held that the Deputy Commissioner could properly conclude that the death was due to exertion associated with his employment and was therefore compensable.
Harry Alexander, Inc. v. Charles Einbinder (C.A.D.C.), decided March 8, 1963.
Act.
These actions are designed to obtain reimbursement for the compensation so paid.
During the fiscal year, a gross recovery of $3,022,63o.28 was obtained.
After deducting the expense of recoveries, a net amount of $2,207,969.16 was available for offset against compensation paid or payable by the United States to the employees or their dependents.
Among other litigation-connected functions of the Division is the furnishing of legal services to the Bureau of Labor Standards in connection with its enforcement of the maritime safety and health program under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, through formal administrative proceedings, civil actions, or criminal prosecutions.
This function was placed in the Division in the latter half of the year.
One formal administrative proceeding has since been instituted.
It was concluded upon the employer's admission of the violations charged and his undertaking to comply in the future.
The Division is also charged with the legal functions relating to the administrative settlement under the Tort Claims Act of claims against the Government arising from acts of Department employees within the scope of their employment.
In the fiscal year, 59 cases raising potential claims against the Government were reviewed.
Seven claims were filed, and six recommendations made for settlement.
The Division of Interpretations and Opinions renders legal services in the area of labor standards, manpower services, unemployment compensation, veterans' reemployment rights, and administrative law.
A primary function of the Division involves interpretations of the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, the Contract Work Hours Standards Act, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, and the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
During the 1g63 fiscal vear, the vast majority of the interpretative opinions rendered in the labor standards area pertained to the Fair Labor Standards Act.
A smaller but substantial number had to do with the new Contract Work Hours Standards Act.
In addition, several interpretative bulletins were revised and considerable work was done toward revision of others in anticipation of the new overtime provisions which became operative September 3, 1963, affecting newly covered employees under the Fair Labor Standards Amendments of 1961.
The past year saw a substantial broadening of manpower service activities, primarily in the areas of training and retraining under the Manpower Development and Training Act and the Area Redevelopment Act.
Department and various agencies throughout the country to carry out our expanded responsibilities in the manpower field.
With respect to the area of foreign labor, the Division engaged in a multitude of activities including furnishing counsel at various wage rate hearings conducted in the discharge of the Department's Immigration and Nationality Act functions.
In the same general area, staff attorneys participated in the development of revised procedures for the implementation of the Secretary's certification authority with respect to the admission of alien workers.
Litigation flowing from foreign labor programs was of special interest again in the fiscal year 1963.
The "commuter" alien situation along the Texas-Mexico border led to the institution of a private suit by the Texas State AFL-CIO challenging the validity of the system whereby aliens admitted to the United States for permanent residence are permitted to reside in Mexico while crossing the border daily to work in the United States.
It was alleged that these"commuters" are in this manner able to undercut the wages and working conditions of resident American labor.
While the Texas State AFL-CIO's action was dismissed in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, the union has filed notice of its intention to appeal that decision.
In a case which arose under the Mexican labor program, a landmark decision upholding the Secretary's broad authority under the adverse effect provisions of Public Law 78 was rendered by the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of California.
Limoneira Co., et al. v. Wirtz, et al. represented a basic challenge to the action of the Department in establishing statewide adverse effect wage rates for Mexican agricultural workers.
The court's holding in support of that action is in the process of being appealed by the farmers who filed the action.
Noteworthy activities in the employment service field included legal assistance in the establishment of policies and regulations designed to assure that the facilities of the nationwide system of public employment offices are made available to all people, without regard to race, creed, or color.
Federal legislation in the field of unemployment compensation enacted during the past vear included the omnibus bill to make permanent improvements in the coverage, benefit, and financing provisions of the Federal-State unemployment compensation system, amendments to the provisions relating to the ceiling on grants to States for unemployment insurance administration, adjustments of the Federal unemployment tax rates, and extension of the period within which States can obligate funds made available under section 9o3(c) of the Social Security Act.
Regulations and the form for Federal-State agreements to implement the worker assistance provision of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 were drafted and assistance was provided by this Division in the preparation of procedures.
Proposed and enacted legislation amending the unemployment compensation laws of 47 States was reviewed and commented on during the year.
Several serious questions were raised as to whether those State laws or proposals met the requirements of Federal law.
These and other important legal issues were analyzed and advice was rendered with respect to the legal problems involved.
In the discharge of its responsibility to assure that the Department complies with the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act and the Federal Register Act, the Division assisted in the drafting and arranged for the publication in the Federal Register of 196 documents.
Sixty-three of these were in the nature of amendments to the Code of Federal Regulations.
Among the published documents were minimum wage orders under the Fair Labor Standards Act for all of the industries in Puerto Rico.
Legal services were provided in connection with the issuance of tentative and final prevailing minimum wage determinations under the Walsh-Healey Act for the electric lamp, electronic equipment, scientific and laboratory instruments, and pump and compressor industries.
The Division provided such services in connection with the tentative determination for the conveyors and conveying equipment industry.
Legal services were furnished in connection with the final determinations and actions for judicial review of the motors and generators and machine tools industries.
The Solicitor's Office also represented the Department in four hearings held under other rule-making provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
More than zoo legal opinions relating to veterans' reemployment rights were prepared or reviewed during fiscal 1963.
A large number of cases were referred to the Justice Department for litigation involving claims arising under reemployment laws.
The 196r amendments to those laws were interpreted, and proposals for further amendments were prepared.
In addition to this work, a comprehensive legal guide and digest of all court decisions and departmental opinion notes in this field was prepared for publication.
The Division of Wage Determinations performs the duties with which the Secretary of Labor is charged by the Davis-Bacon Act, related statutes, and Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 195o.
The Division predetermines minimum wages to be paid laborers and mechanics under contracts subject to the Davis-Bacon Act and related prevailing wage statutes.
These predeterminations reflect the wages found to be prevailing in the city, town, village, or other civil subdivision of the State in which work is to be performed.
The Division also handles coordination and enforcement functions vested in the Secretary by Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 195o, the purpose of which is to achieve coordination of administration and consistency in the enforcement of minimum wage and overtime statutes covered by its provisions.
Also of continuing significance in terms of the Division's responsibilities was enforcement of the Contract Work Hours Standards Act, enacted in fiscal 1962.
In general, this act replaces the Eight-Hour Laws and provides a uniform requirement of overtime compensation at time and one-half the basic rate for hours worked over 8 in a day or 4o in a week.
The act, in addition to covering contracts of the United States which may involve the employment of laborers and mechanics, also covers contracts which by law are required to include wage rates predetermined by this Department.
Excepted, however, are projects where the Government's only assistance is in the nature of a loan guarantee, or insurance.
This refers to Federal Housing Administration insured housing.
Contracts of the Commodity Credit Corporation and the Tennessee Valley Authority have been, pursuant to the intent of the Senate as stated in a committee report on the bill, exempted in regulations issued under section 1os of the act.
Construction contracts under $2,ooo have been exempted from the Contract Work Hours Standards Act.
The enactment of the Public Works Acceleration Act provided additional funds for construction of public works on an accelerated basis.
Passage of this act substantially increased the Division's workload.
To further effectuate the purposes of this legislation, the Division gave priority to such requests, issued countywide determinations for use by any agency constructing projects under the act, and extended the validity period of such determinations to 12o days.
The Division issued 46,397 wage determinations during fiscal year 1963.
A total number of 46,038 items of correspondence were issued in connection with these wage determination matters.
The Division opened 1,478 enforcement cases.
A total of 1,632 cases were processed to completion, a record yearly high.
In those cases involving serious violations of the various statutes within the scope of Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 195o, ineligibility sanctions were imposed against 2o contractors (firms and individuals).
As a result of enforcement actions, more money was collected for more employees than in any previous year; restitution totaling $548,843.96 was secured for 5,118 laborers and mechanics.
The Division continued during the year the publication of its series of "all agency" memoranda and Davis-Bacon Act opinions with respect to coverage problems and related matters.
These memoranda and opinions aided in promoting consistency in the enforcement of statutes within the purview of Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 195o.
In addition, the Division issued a large number of interpretations and opinions to contractors and employees advising them of their rights and responsibilities under these statutes.
The recent reorganization of the Solicitor's Office resulted in a realignment of the duties and responsibilities of the Legislation Division.
As now constituted, there are five areas of responsibility in the Division— legislation, labor-management relations and general legal services, hearing examiners, decision writing, and research, analysis, and reference.
The legal functions of the Department relating to pending and proposed legislation are discharged through attorneys in the Legislation Division.
The activities of the staff in the preparation of legislative proposals, testimony, analyses, explanatory statements, and other legislative materials for the Secretary and other Department officials assumed special importance during the second session of the 87th Congress and the first session of the 88th Congress.
It culminated in the enactment of several "top priority' items in the Administration's legislative program.
The Department has direct responsibility for administering one of the proposals which was enacted into law—the Equal Pay Act, Public Law 88-38.
It also assumes vital areas of responsibility under the Trade Expansion Act, Public Law 87-794, and the Public Works Acceleration Act, Public Law 87-658.
Under the Public Works Acceleration Act, the Secretary of Labor is responsible for determining legally what areas are eligible, on the basis of employment studies, to receive Federal assistance on public works projects.
The Trade Expansion Act will enable this country to increase its exports and provide adjustment assistance for workers adversely affected by increased imports.
An important Administration measure which was the subject of congressional hearings during the 1963 fiscal year is the Youth Employment Act.
The purpose of this proposal is to provide healthful employment for youths now unemployed and at the same time provide through State and local governments useful work experience and training opportunities for unemployed young men and women so that their employability may be increased.
The Solicitor's Office prepared testimony for the Secretary's use during congressional hearings on the President's tax cut and tax reform program.
At other hearings on the proposed extension of the Mexican labor program, the Department recommended certain safeguards to provide benefits to domestic migrant workers similar to those accorded Mexican nationals.
The Solicitor testified at hearings on proposed amendments to the Davis-Bacon Act which would include fringe benefits in the determination of prevailing wages for laborers and mechanics on certain Government contracts.
The legislative staff provided assistance to congressional committees, Members of Congress, and officials of the Department in connection with these and many other legislative items.
The preparation of reports to congressional committees and the Bureau of the Budget expressing the Department's views on proposed and pending legislation continued at a high level of activity during the 1963 fiscal year.
Many of the reports involved extensive legal analysis and policy coordination with officials of the Department and other Government agencies.
In addition, the staff maintained a continuing legislative reference service consisting of a daily digest of the Congressional Record, the preparation of other legislative reference materials, and the answering of daily inquiries concerning the status and other aspects of legislative items.
The labor-management relations and general legal services responsibilities include a broad range of complex and controversial statutes and programs which are not administered by the Department, but on which the Secretary of Labor, as the top labor official in the Government, offers advice and counsel to the President and the Congress.
Prominent among these statutes and programs are the Taft-Hartley Act and the Railway Labor Act.
The legal issues which arise in this area, in addition to a large body of specialized labor relations laws, involve the broadest range of subjects, since they are determined by the problems which may face the Secretary of Labor at any given time.
An important function of the attorneys engaged in this activity is to provide advisory legal services to the Office of the Secretary and other offices and bureaus of the Department not otherwise serviced.
Indicating the high level of activity of this function and the legislative function, a total of 721 analyses, memoranda, and orders, 777 letters for the Secretary's signature, and 2,817 letters for the signature of the Solicitor were prepared during the fiscal year.
In addition, the staff performed other legal functions, such as reviewing contracts entered into by the Department.
The Division drafted standards of conduct for employee organizations and a code of fair labor practices, which implements Executive Order 1o988 concerning employee-management relations in the Federal service.
It also drafted rules for the nomination of arbitrators under section 1r of the order.
The Division continues to furnish legal advice on the application of the Executive order and its implementing documents.
The hearing examiners held 55 hearings during the fiscal year pursuant to various laws administered by the Department of Labor.
Most of these hearings, 44, involved alleged violations of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act; 36 decisions were rendered in these cases.
Three hearings involved the determination of prevailing minimum wages under the Public Contracts Act.
Eight other hearings were conducted pursuant to the Davis-Bacon Act, the Fair Labor Standards Act, and other labor standards statutes.
In the area of decision writing, the staff provides legal assistance to the Emplovees' Compensation Appeals Board in the adjudication of cases under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act which have been appealed from the initial administrative decision of the Bureau of Employees' Compensation.
They prepare drafts of the opinions expressing Board decisions, furnish legal advice to the Board, and perform research assignments of a special nature on request of the Appeals Board or the Solicitor.
During the year, a total of 3o6 cases were received for the preparation of opinions and 2zo decisions were written.
The average time between receipt of a case from the Appeals Board and the preparation of a decision was reduced to slightly in excess of i month, as compared with an average of approximately 3 months which prevailed a few years ago.
Research, analysis, and reference is a new area of activity established during the recent reorganization of the Solicitor's Office.
Its function is to review the past work of the Office of the Solicitor, and to prepare the appropriate analytical and reference systems and necessary research materials so that attorneys in the Office will have only to research the system instead of the individual opinions, interpretations, determinations, and decisions.
The purpose of this program is to conserve the attorney's time without sacrificing accuracy, substance, thoroughness, and completeness.
During fiscal year 1963, the staff was engaged in preparing a "Legislative History of the Fair Labor Standards Amendments of 196r," a digest of key opinions rendered in the past by the Solicitor on the Davis-Bacon and related acts, digests of current Solicitor's opinions in all areas, and reports and miscellaneous papers.
The principal work of this Division consists of rendering advice to the Bureau of Labor-Management Reports¹ in connection with responsibilities of the Department under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, supervising the Department's legal iunctions under that act, and providing legal services to the Office of Welfare and Pension Plans¹ with respect to the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act.
During the year, 16o cases were referred to the Solicitot by the Bureau of Labor-Management Reports for possible legal action under the LMRDA.
Civil action was instituted in the Federal district courts in 25 cases after analysis and consideration.
Sixty-seven cases were transmitted to the Department of Justice with recommendation for criminal prosecution.
The Division, through which all of the Department's legal enforcement activities under the act are performed and coordinated, participated during the year in 1o defensive actions brought against the Secretary in Federal and State courts.
The Division also participated in one U.S. Board of Parole hearing where the petition for a certificate of exemption from the prohibitory provisions of section 5o4 of the LMRDA was denied.
Seventyfive private actions involving the LMRDA were also reviewed during the year to determine the effect, if any, such actions would have on the Secretary's responsibilities under the act.
Of the 25 civil actions instituted in the Federal courts, 15 involved violations of the election provisions of the act, 5 were instituted to enforce compliance with administrative subpenas issued by the Commissioner of Labor-Management Reports, 4 were instituted to compel the filing of required reports, and i civil action, the first filed by the Secretary under the trusteeship provisions of the act, was instituted to terminate an improper trusteeship.
Twelve election cases, 9 of which were instituted prior to the start of this fiscal year, were favorably concluded with the entry of orders directing rerun elections under the supervision of the Secretary.
Several of these cases resulted in important court decisions construing the provisions of the act relating to union officer elections.
In one case, Wirtz v. Amarillo General Drivers, Local 577, 214 F. Supp.
74 (N.D. Texas, 1963), the district court held that section 4o1(e) of the act protected union members from being declared ineligible for union office because of lack of good standing, due to nonpayment of dues, where the delay in payment of their dues under a checkoff arrangement was caused by the failure of the employer to make timely deductions; and that a requirement in the union constitution that a member could not be a candidate for office without advance dues payment every month for a 2-year period was so rigid as to be unreasonable.
In Wirtz v. District Council No. 2r, Brotherhood of Painters, 211 F. Supp.
253 (E.D. Pa., 1962), it was held that a labor organization was not entitled to a jury trial in an action brought under the election provisions of the act.
The Federal district court in Puerto Rico, in directing that a challenged election be rerun under the supervision of the Secretary, held that these provisions apply to labor organizations, union officers and representatives, and employers engaged in agricultural operations which affect interstate commerce.
See Wirtz v. Union de Trabajadores Industria Azucarera Fase Agricola, Guayama, Inc., Local 8o4, Affiliated with the Packingbouse Workers' Syndicate, District No. 9 of Puerto Rico, AFL–CIO, 52LRRM2213, 46 L.C. 17,994 (D.P.R., 1962).
Of the five cases in which court orders were entered directing compliance with administrative subpenas issued by the Commissioner, three were filed during this fiscal vear.
In each instance the position of the Department regarding the scope of its authority to investigate and to issue subpenas in aid thereof was upheld.
Of major significance is the decision in Wirtz v. Local 191, International Brotberbood of Teamsters, (D. Conn., 1963).
The Federal district court, in directing the union to comply with the subpena, held that the Secretary's broad investigatory authority granted by section 6or includes the right to investigate union elections for possible violations and that this right is not limited by the provisions of section 4oz; i.e., the Secretary in conducting an investigation or seeking to enforce a subpena is not required to show first that a complaint has been filed with him pursuant to section 4oz(a).
This decision was subsequently affirmed by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
Other decisions construing the Secretary's authority to conduct investigations have held that the Secretary's right to inspect union records includes the right to retain the original documents for a reasonable time and to make copies.
See Wirtz v. Local 87s, International Brotherbood of Teamsters, 216 F. Supp.
798 (E.D.N.Y., 1963) and Wirtz v. Hod Carriers' and Common Laborers' Union, Local 502, 52 LRRM 2133, 46 L.C. 17,851 (D.N.J., 1962).
It has also been decided that the Secretary is authorized by section 6or to investigate and to exercise his subpena power to determine whether a particalar labor organization, officer, or employer is subject to the act's requirements.
See Wirtz v. Electricians and Associates, Inc., 51 LRRM 2675, 46 L.C. 17,937 (D. Minn., 1962).
In addition to the 25 civil actions filed under the LMRDA, 2 civil actions, the first cases to be filed under the WPPDA, were prepared in this Division.
These actions seek to compel the administrators of certain welfare and pension plans subject to this act to comply with its reporting requirements.
During the year, extensive legal assistance was provided the Bureau of Labor-Management Reports and the Office of Welfare and Pension Plans ¹ in the preparation of regulations, reporting forms and various technical assistance aids, and other publications.
Regulations issued under the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act include: (r) a regulation relating to welfare and pension plans with less than 1oo participants (sections 5 and 7); (2) a regulation covering the basic bonding requirements imposed by section 13 of the act; (3) a regulation with respect to the granting of exemptions from the bonding requirements of the act (section 13(e)); and (4) a regulation covering the meaning of section 13(c).
The Division also compiled and prepared for publication the "Legislative History of the WPPDA of 1958, as Amended by Public Law 87-42o of 1962."
This volume was published in January 1963.
A comprehensive legislative history relating to the first six titles of the LMRDA was prepared for publication.
It is anticipated that this volume will also be available to the public in the near future.
During fiscal year 1963, approximately 2,65o written opinions were issued involving the LMRDA and 1,50o under the WPPDA.
These opinions were given to the operating bureaus and to the public in connection with specific problems of interpretation arising under these laws.
In addition, the Division gave approximately 25,ooo oral opinions (with regard to the two laws within its responsibility) in response to telephone calls, informal conferences with bureau personnel, and requests from the public in connection with the administration and enforcement of the programs entrusted to the Division.
During fiscal 1963, the Office of the Solicitor expanded its services to the Department in the area of international activities.
This work was primarily the responsibility of a newly created office of Special Assistant for International Labor Affairs.
The work of the office may be divided into four categories.
First, the office provided services in connection with the International Labor Organization.
These included preparation of annual reports, position papers, memoranda of law concerning ratification of convention, and the like.
Second, the office was engaged in providing legal advice in international economic problems.
These were, first, activities under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, both in connection with proposed tariff negotiations and in the promulgation of regulations for the administration of the worker assistance program.
Second, they were in connection with the International Cotton Textile Agreement and its administration by the Department of Labor as one of five interested agencies.
The former, insofar as the activities fell within the jurisdiction of the Department of Labor's Committee on Foreign Economic Policy, represented legal services to that committee.
The office also advised the Department's representatives on the Trade Staff Committee, Trade Executive Committee, and Trade Expansion Act Advisory Committee.
Third, the office assisted in the negotiation of a new contract with the Agency for International Development pursuant to which the Department of Labor will perform increased services in foreign assistance programs of the United States.
Finally, the office provided legal services in connection with a labor dispute on the Great Lakes involving both Canadian and United States unions and employers which has seriously disrupted shipping on the Great Lakes and irritated relations between the United States and Canada.
The American labor force—its size, composition, and potential—has been a major interest of the U.S. Department of Labor since the agency's establishment in 1913.
Long the principal governmental source of statistical information in this field, the Department has concerned itself also with the development of work skills, the employment security of millions of our citizens, the matching of jobs and people, and a host of other considerations equally important to the Nation's economic well-being and growth.
Now, a new dimension has been added to the Department's role in this vital area of economic life.
Our modern technological age, along with a dramatically expanding population, has produced an entire restructuring of the Nation's manpower resources.
Involved are a labor force which in many respects is ill-prepared to meet the forces of economic change now sweeping across our industrial society, and an unemployment problem reflected in the idleness of 5 to 6 percent of the Nation's work force throughout the period of the late 195o's and early 196o's.
All that is involved was succinctly described by President Kennedy as 'the number one domestic concern of the United States in the 196o's.
In the resolution of that concern, the Labor Department is charged with a high degree of responsibility.
It is attempting to meet that responsibility both through an intensification of some of its traditional services and the initiation and development of new programs assigned to it by the Congress.
Two such programs—the Area Redevelopment Act of 196r and the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962—have led to the establishment of a new arm of the Department of Labor which seeks to coordinate and expand all departmental efforts in the broad field of manpower utilization.
In February 1963, all departmental functions relating to employment, unemployment, and the effective use of the Nation's manpower in general were brought together under a new structure called the Manpower Administration.
The Administration is built around a framework of three existing Department agencies: the Bureau of Employment Security, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, and the Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training.
Assigned functions under the Public Works Acceleration Act.
In addition to these specific responsibilities, the Manpower Administration oversees and coordinates all manpower-related activities of the Department as a whole.
The respective reports of the three basic agencies in the Manpower Administration follow.
During fiscal year 1963, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training carried out its responsibility of working with labor and management in establishing, improving, and expanding apprenticeship and other on-thejob training programs by industry.
This was accomplished through 12 regional offices with representatives in each of the so States.
A national coordinator was added to the BAT staff to work in the field of nondiscrimination in the employment of minorities as apprentices.
The new staff member directed the efforts of the four industrial training advisers stationed in Chicago, San Francisco, New York, and Atlanta, and also served as industrial training adviser for the District of Columbia.
An apprenticeship information center was opened in the District of Columbia as a pilot project for similar centers in the larger industrial and manufacturing cities.
The centers are the joint function of the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training and the Bureau of Employment Security.
The Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training and local employment offices cooperate with local organizations in the establishment and operation of the centers, which are designed to inform and counsel youth on apprenticeship opportunities and to refer interested persons to employers and joint labor-management apprenticeship committees.
Open to all persons interested in apprenticeship, the centers provide apprenticeship information suitable for youths, schools, guidance departments, minority groups, local unions, employer associations, and the general public.
They also provide individual and group counseling for apprentice applicants, with emphasis on locating job openings in apprenticeable trades.
The Bureau worked closely with the Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunity in Apprenticeship appointed by the Secretary of Labor.
Composed of outstanding representatives of labor, management, education, minority groups, and the general public, the group is chaired by the Under Secretary of Labor in his capacity as Manpower Administrator of the Department.
The committee has the responsibility of advising the Department on the development and promotion of more effective programs and policies in the broad area of equal opportunity in both apprenticeable and other occupations requiring high-level skills.
The Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training has been assigned the responsibility for on-the-job training under the Manpower Development and Training Act of rg62.
Agreements have been made with employers, labor unions, associations, and public agencies to conduct training programs which use their facilities to train the unemployed, the underemployed, and youth in need of skills.
The first on-the-job training contract under the act was executed early in March 1963.
By June 30, 42 such contracts providing for the training of 1,627 persons in 117 occupations had been approved and 181 trainees had completed training in 6 occupations.
Training costs for the 117 projects amounted to about $717,00o and wages paid to trainees by employers approximated $r,468,ooo.
Contracts were executed with 3o employers, I employer association, 2 joint apprenticeship and training committees, and 4 unions.
The Federal Committee on Apprenticeship, which serves in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of Labor, took an active part in the observance of the 2sth anniversary of the national apprenticeship program in fiscal year 1963.
At an all-day celebration in Washington, certificates of appreciation wete presented to many individuals and organizations that had made a major contribution to apprenticeship over the 25 years.
Displays featuring blowups of the national apprenticeship program commemorative postage stamp and the Department of Labor seal were arranged in department stores in 11 major cities.
The stamp was issued August 31, 1962, in Washington, and first-day sales amounted to 1,147,554.
The number of stamps printed totaled 12o million.
During fiscal year 1963, the Federal Committee assumed a more active interest in the program of the Bureau.
It held three regular sessions and arranged for task forces from its membership to concern themselves with specified areas of endeavor.
Two of these task forces, one on defense contracts and the other concerning on-the-job training under the Manpower Development and Training Act, held meetings.
The Federal Committee also recommended that a safety provision clause be included in all apprenticeship standards.
The Bureau maintained close working relationships with State apprenticeship agencies to strengthen mutual cooperation.
The Bureau provided a clearinghouse service to State agencies to disseminate informational material regarding both apprenticeship and training.
A joint meeting of the Bureau and State apprenticeship agencies was held in January 1963, and it was agreed that a State-Federal Liaison Committee be formed to coordinate activity.
The first meeting ot the committee was held May 23, 1963.
The joint Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training and American Vocational Association Committee held a meeting in Washington early in January 1963.
Groundwork was laid for the establishment of similar joint committees on the local level.
In the field of manpower mobilization, the construction task force project advanced from the pilot stage to the establishment of 18 additional project site locations throughout the country.
These task forces are on call by the local Civil Defense in event of a national or natural disaster.
At Waco, Tex., and Pueblo, Colo., the construction task force was coordinated with the Bureau of Employment Security's preassigned team plan project that deals primarily with resource areas such as feeding and shelter programs.
The six project areas in Florida were expanded to include additional construction trades.
There were excellent results in establishing working relationships between parole officers and local joint apprenticeship committees in California, Ohio, and Washington.
A working relationship was also developed with the Bureau of Prisons, and a program was worked out to encourage vocational training staffs in correctional institutions to adopt the same criteria in their training programs as those in industrial apprenticeship programs.
A total of 87 participants from 26 foreign countries were given an opportunity to observe apprenticeship and other training methods in 55 different industrial fields.
Sixty-seven participants completed their training programs and returned to their home countries.
A considerable number of these reported promotions or greater job responsibilities as a result of their training.
During the year, the Governor of the Virgin Islands requested the Bureau to provide assistance to his government in establishing an apprenticeship law, creating an apprenticeship council, and inaugurating several apprenticeship programs.
A Bureau representative was assigned to this project and all objectives were completed.
The Bureau cooperated with the Bureau of International Labor Affairs and the Department of Commerce in recruiting qualified personnel to set up and man exhibits at trade fairs around the world.
It sent technical personnel to the trade fair at Poznan, Poland, and to the Cyprus Trade Fair.
The Chief of the Division of Review and Registration went to Caracas, Venezuela, and assisted the National Institute of Cooperative Education in establishing apprenticeship and training activities in that country.
The Administrator of the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training went to Geneva, Switzerland, where he participated in the Tripartite Technical Meeting for Printing and Allied Trades.
A BAT staff member participated in the 7th session of the ILO Textiles Committee in Geneva.
The Bureau prepared a nationwide survey of training in industry which will be published in fiscal year 1964.
Some 8,00o schedules were coded and a preliminary report released.
The report showed that approximately 700,o0o establishments employed 36 million workers—2.7 million of whom were enrolled in one or more formal training programs.
A study of training and joint apprenticeship committee activity in the printing industry was completed and published.
Entitled "Compositor, Composing Room Machinist and Mailer Joint Apprenticeship Committee Project," the study provides a summary and analysis of activities of joint apprenticeship committees and the extent of new process training of journeymen to update their skills.
Articles were researched, written, and placed in a number of national publications, including Technology, the monthly review of training and education for industry published by the London, England, Times, and the Washington Report of the United States Chamber of Commerce.
Two new Bureau publications were issued.
These were"First 1o Winners of the Patterson Memorial Award" and "Observance of the 25th Anniversary of the National Apprenticeship Program.
In addition, the Bureau provided 14 national apprenticeship and training standards, one of which (on draftsmen) was revised; issued 7 reprints from international and national publications; and displayed Bureau exhibits on 19 occasions at State fairs and apprenticeship and training conferences and conventions.
A total of 306,30o Bureau publications were distributed to associations, employers, unions, individuals, educational institutions, public libraries, State and Federal agencies, and foreign representatives.
This was an increase of 45,300 over fiscal year 1962.
Promotional activities of the field staff included servicing 189,ooo establishments, visiting 135,o0o local industrial establishments or labor organizations, and making 8,556 public appearances, which included speeches, film showings, radio and television presentations, and related methods of creating public awareness of the need for the training of workers.
There were approximately 2oo showings of the Bureau's film "Skills for Progress.
The work of the field staff was reflected in the establishment of 2,307 new programs during the year, 1,189 of which were apprenticeship programs and 1,118, journeyman and other training programs.
In addition, the field staff made 2,572 visits to obtain training opportunities for international participation.
The Bureau encouraged industry to employ apprenticeship and training coordinators.
During fiscal 1963, there were 44 national apprenticeship and training coordinators and 271 local coordinators employed.
The Bureau launched a series of meetings to acquaint national apprenticeship and training coordinators and directors, international union officials, and representatives of national employer associations with the on-the-job training provisions of the Manpower Development and Training Act.
The meetings were designed to focus discussion on the coordination of efforts by industry and government in increasing training opportunities for the unemployed, the underemployed, and those whose skills had become obsolete because of technological change.
A total of 3,227 apprenticeship and training programs were examined.
Registration actions numbered 1,678, including new programs, changes in programs, and cancellations.
A total of 7,4oo certificates were issued, including certificates of completion of apprenticeship and certificates of meritorious service honoring individuals or groups.
The Bureau of Employment Security is concerned with two major Federal-State programs—employment service and unemployment insurance.
The first is concerned primarily with finding employment for workers that will utilize their highest skills and referring qualified applicants to employers with job openings; the second, with providing eligible workers partial replacement of wage loss caused by involuntary unemployment.
With the passage of the Area Redevelopment Act and the Manpower Development and Training Act, the Bureau's United States Employment Service was given added responsibilities with respect to assessing manpower needs and requirements, promoting manpower development and training, and assisting community groups in area redevelopment efforts.
Both acts utilize the unemployment insurance machinery for disbursement of funds to workers being trained for work.
Under the Trade Expansion Act, the Bureau was given not only training provisions but, for the first time, responsibility concerning relocation allowances for workers and readjustment allowances for workers who are affected adversely by actions taken under the act.
The Bureau's overall responsibilities with respect to employment service and unemployment insurance activities are to study and recommend any changes necessary in the programs to meet current or anticipated needs of wage earners and employers; to administer employment security programs as required by Federal law or other delegated authority; and to promote understanding and acceptance of the employment security system.
As the Federal partner in the employment security system (consisting of the Bureau and affiliated State employment security agencies with their 1,90o local public employment offices throughout the Nation), the Bureau is responsible for insuring proper and efficient administration by the State agencies of employment security programs; insuring conformity of State laws with requirements of Federal laws and regulations, and compliance of State administration with State laws which meet Federal requirements; encouraging States to improve State legislation and administration; and providing continuing technical assistance and interchange of experience and information.
Also, the Bureau guides and assists State agencies in cairying out employment service and unemployment insurance activities and their responsibilities under recent legislation; provides labor, management, government, and the public with labor market and other information related to the operation of the employment security system; provides needed supplemental foreign farmworkers and insures that their employment does not affect adversely domestic workers similarly employed; develops and maintains capability for meeting national emergency or other disaster needs for civilian manpower; and assists other nations to improve methods for achieving their employment security objectives.
The Bureau has responsibility for the system of administrative financing of employment security programs and activities, including fiscal accountability.
Administrative costs for the operation of the programs are met from congressional appropriations, with 1oo percent "grants" for program administration apportioned by the Secretary of Labor to cooperating State agencies.
In addition, the Bureau administers Federal unemployment compensation programs covering separated employees of the Federal Government and ex-servicemen; operates a system for clearing labor between the several States; maintains a public employment service for the District of Columbia; and performs activities related to the importation of foreign workers.
Since the effectiveness of Bureau activities is measured best in the seryices provided to workers and employers through local offices of State employment security agencies, this report is not limited to the Bureau but includes both Federal and State efforts with respect to employment security programs.
On February 19, 1963, the Bureau of Employment Security, together with the Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training and the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, became a part of a new Manpower Administration in the Department of Labor.
The Administrator of the Bureau was charged with responsibility in the field of manpower operations.
The establishment of the new Manpower Administration by the Secretary of Labor reflected increased national concern with problems of unemployment and supported Bureau action, undertaken in fiscal year 1962, to strengthen its own structure and the capability of State employment security agencies to meet new manpower responsibilities.
Program emphases of a major area are included in the appropriate sections of this report under employment service, farm labor, or unemployment insurance.
Those activities described below affect all phases of the employment security program.
As a result of additional funds made available by the Congress for the preceding year, the Federal-State employment security system began fiscal 1963 with more staff resources in the public employment offices than were available in the preceding ro years.
To help State agencies train their new staff members and increase the competence of their other employees, the Bureau made staff development and utilization a subject of special emphasis in fiscal year 1963.
Through "train-the-trainer" institutes, the Bureau guided State training supervisors in more effective training of operating supervisors and program technicians.
It also encouraged greater use of out-service training by which university or other special college level courses, related to the technical field of individual participants, are selected and approved by the agencies and the Bureau as supplementing in-service training.
Four conferences on executive leadership and management were sponsored by the Bureau in cooperation with four leading universities University of California, Cornell, Michigan State, and University of Washington) for training State agency administrators and key members of their staffs and 21 Bureau staff members.
Discussions included problems affecting the employment security program.
Course content of these conferences related general principles of leadership and management to employment security operations.
In the organization and administration of personnel management programs, direct assistance was given to several States in revising job classification and compensation plans, and guide materials were developed for State agency use in installing effective plans for staffing variable workloads typical of the unemployment insurance program.
Model position descriptions were distributed to States for use in upgrading minimum qualification standards.
Other assistance in the area of management included preliminary work on development of a revised budgeting system; two important revisions in fiscal standards to require State agency administrators to exercise greater responsibility with respect to goods, facilities, and services supplied by other departments and to establish more specific requirements for agencies to meet in negotiating space for State or local offices; establishment of a management techniques-and-methods exchange; and procedures for assembling materials useful in analysis of State requirements for equipment replacement and development of ground rules for such replacement.
Emphasis was placed also on removing discriminatory barriers in the hiring of staff.
A revision was issued in the standards for a merit system of personnel administration requiring that each State employment security agency have specific prohibitions in its law or rules against racial discrimination in employment and that the law or rules provide for appeals by persons who allege discriminatory treatment.
As a result of continued effort, segregated services were eliminated in 19 of 26 local public employment offices which had been segregated at the beginning of fiscal year 1963.
Geographically separate offices—maintained for serving nonwhite applicants—were closed, and offices having separate divisions within the same building were reorganized so that all applicants could be served without regard to race or color.
At the end of the fiscal year, State agencies made firm commitments with respect to the remaining seven offices—to integrate the four divisional offices by July 15, 1963, and to consolidate operations of the three geographic offices with other operations on a nonsegregated basis by November 1963.
State and local employment offices were directed to comply fully with established policies of the United States Employment Service which prohibit any form of discrimination based on race, creed, color, or national origin in services provided to applicants, claimants, or others.
In each regional office of the Bureau, a staff member was designated to work on minority group employment problems, and State agencies were urged to appoint minority group representatives.
An employment-oriented pamphlet, “America Is for Everybody," was published by the Bureau to commemorate the 1ooth anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation.
The Federal Advisory Council, representing employers, employees, and the public, was reconstituted by the Secretary of Labor in cooperation with the Bureau to consider manpower needs of the Nation and to recommend the appropriate role of the employment security system in meeting those needs.
To broaden its perspective, the Bureau studied manpower trends, problems, programs, and policies of a number of European countries.
The activities of the public employment offices were subjected to attack in fiscal year 1963 by means of letters written to Members of Congress by officials of many fee-charging employment agencies.
Public employment offices made some 6.6 million nonagricultural placements in fiscal year 1963—the highest placement level since World War II, and 2 percent above the fiscal 1962 level, also a record year.
Farm placements, however, at 7.9 million, reflected rapid advances in farm mechanization and were down slightly more than a million from the 9.o million for fiscal 1962.
Permanent improvements in the unemployment insurance program were proposed by the Administration to fill gaps in protection afforded the unemployed and to make the program more responsive to changes in the economy.
More than 9,ooo were enrolled for training under the Area Redevelopment Act in fiscal 1963 and more than 30,o0o under the Manpower Development and Training Act.
By yearend, about 7o percent of the graduates under both programs had obtained employment, mostly in training-related occupations.
Segregated services were eliminated in 19 of 26 local offices which were still segregated at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Firm commitments were made for operating the remaining seven offices on a nonsegregated basis by November 1963.
Interarea recruitment played a more crucial role in the labor market as demand increased for highly skilled and professional workers.
By means of the professional office network, applicants' qualifications and employer job orders are circulated speedily among the 124 offices of the network, and those offices draw, as necessary, on resources of 1,9oo local offices throughout the Nation.
Public employment offices increased their counseling and testing activities to meet responsibilities under the Area Redevelopment Act and the Manpower Development and Training Act, needs of rising numbers of youth and women in the labor force, and problems of older workers displaced from long-time employment as a result of automation and technological change.
Increased effort was made to use domestic farmworkers more effectively and to reduce need for supplementary foreign workers.
Amendments to unemployment insurance laws of 1o States increased maximum weekly benefit amounts, but their effect was offset partially by a trend toward more difficult qualifying requirements in terms of higher required wages or more weeks of work and more stringent disqualifications.
Public employment services tackled the school dropout problem on many fronts—by extending and improving counseling and placement services, giving priority to youth in training programs under the Manpower Development and Training Act, making wide use of the employmentoriented film "When I'm Old Enough, Goodbye!" and participating with community groups concerned with the problem.
In fiscal year 1963, one out of three veterans was over 45 years of age.
However, while comprising only 23.4 percent of male applicants in local employment offices, veterans accounted for 3o.5 percent of all male nonfarm placements in fiscal year 1963.
Experiments with machine processes for unemployment insurance data were designed to simplify and improve procedures and to provide more time for effective applicant interviewing and determination of benefit eligibility; for employment service, to expedite—by means of a telecommunications network—the interchange of labor supply and demand information among local employment offices.
State unemployment insurance reserves increased for the second successive year.
On June 30, 1963, they were 6.9 percent above the year-earlier level.
More adequate State laws relating to unemployment insurance financing were enacted in 18 States.
The nationwide public employment service system, created by the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933, celebrated its 3oth anniversary in fiscal year 1963.
The United States Employment Service and affiliated State employment services, with their network of about 1,90o local employment offices, have facilities and resources which reach into all labor markets of the Nation.
The system has been responsible for 325 million farm and nonfarm job placements in the 3o years of its existence.
Matching men and jobs continues to be the primary mission of the employment service, but its responsibilities have been broadened.
During fiscal year 1963, program emphasis included not only improvement of basic placement functions but reorganization of metropolitan area local offices; job market services to youth; easing the impact of automation and technological change; manpower training under the Area Redevelopment Act and the Manpower Development and Training Act; labor market operations research; and assistance to State employment services in improving their administration and management functions.
Fiscal year 1963 was the first full year of operation of the reconstituted United States Employment Service as an organizational entity.
It continued to work with State employment services on the actual physical separation of employment service and unemployment insurance functions in local offices in major metropolitan areas and on the reorganization of these offices on an occupational-industrial basis.
Improved services resulting from these changes were reflected in placements which increased by 5.5 percent in the 55 largest metropolitan areas over the previous fiscal year as compared with a r.9 percent increase for all local offices.
Placements of professional workers rose 12 percent over the year.
Under the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, the public employment service system was given primary responsibility for identifying training needs, supplying qualified trainees, and placing graduate trainees.
In fiscal 1963, significant progress was made in initiating MDTA training projects.
The area labor market information program was expanded to provide data needed by the Secretary of Labor in designating areas of substantial unemployment—a responsibility placed on him by the Public Works Acceleration Act of 1962.
In the early 196o's, young people were entering the labor market at the rate of 2 million a year and were experiencing ever increasing difficulty in finding jobs.
The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate for youth under 20 years of age was 16.o percent in June 1963 as compared with 12.4 percent in June 1962.
To deal with this problem, local employment offices stepped up their counseling, testing, job development, and placement services for young people and worked with school officials to strengthen the cooperative ES-school program.
Progress in major program areas is described in the following sections.
In fiscal year 1963, public employment offices made some 6.6 million nonagricultural placements, the highest fiscal-year placement level since World War II.
Nonfarm placements were 1.9 percent above the fiscal 1962 level, also a record year.
About 3.3 million nonfarm placements were made in the 55 major metropolitan areas, 5.5 percent more than in the preceding year.
Among occupational groups, the professional and managerial category, with 247,5∞o placements, recorded the sharpest increase—12 percent.
Small rises occurred in the clerical-sales, unskilled, and service groups; a minor decline, in the combined skilled and semiskilled category.
Among industry divisions, services, with about 2,557,o0o placements, showed the greatest gain—nearly 6 percent.
Placements in trade, at 1,560,000, represented a 3.7 percent increase over the preceding fiscal year, while the number of construction placements, at 455,ooo, remained virtually unchanged.
Other industry divisions (manufacturing, public utilities, and government) recorded small losses.
The United States Employment Service in collaboration with the California Department of Employment experimented with a labor inventory communications system.
This project (LINCS) is designed to provide rapid long-distance transmittal of placement data and computer processing of these data for use in screening large numbers of employer job order specifications against worker qualifications, particularly in professional occupations.
It seeks new and speedier methods of aiding, not replacing, human factors in worker recruitment, selection, and referral.
A fully operational teletype network, linking nine California offices, was used to interchange labor supply and demand information.
Experiments in the integration of this network with the automatic data processing phase were continuing at the end of the fiscal year.
If the project proves successful, it will be expanded to other areas.
In addition to increasing the timeliness and efficiency of placement operations, this system would provide a rapid means of work force mobilization in the event of a national emergency.
With vastly increased demand for professional manpower and with shortages existing in supply, the employment service strengthened its professional placement service to help insure its best utilization.
In fiscal year 1963, placements in professional and managerial occupations rose to 247,500, compared with 220,900 in fiscal 1962.
Efforts were continued to reorganize employment offices in the 55 largest metropclitan areas to meet the needs of the professional and technical segment of the work force.
In June 1963, professional and technical workers numbered 7.8 million and accounted for about I out of 8 persons in the labor force.
Convenient, suitably equipped offices were established along industrialoccupational lines and were located in population centers to conform closely to employment patterns of professional, technical, scientific, and managerial persons.
By the end of the fiscal year, an identifiable facility either a separate professional office or a division of a "white collar" office serving professional, clerical, and sales occupations—was provided in 49 localities.
Accumulation of detailed information on the job content of professional occupations was started by USES in cooperation with State employment services.
The intormation, which includes those jobs newly created by the changing patterns of industry, will be refined ultimately into comprehensive interviewing aids for use by local office personnel.
Bureau and State employment service representatives contacted professional, business, and educational associations to acquaint them with the professional placement program, and services were made available, upon their request, to college officials in the placement of college dropouts and graduates.
During the period September 1961 to August 1962, over 10,300 students were placed in professional career jobs by the employment service.
With rapid changes in technology causing the obsolescence of some occupations and industries, while creating others, and with an increased demand for more and more highly skilled and professional workers, inter-.
The professional office network at the end of the fiscal year consisted of 124 offices.
Speedy, direct communication, improved procedures, and an intimate knowledge of technological and professional occupations enabled the staff in those offices to make a significant contribution in this highly specialized placement field.
The network circulated applicants'qualifications and employers' orders, as necessary, and drew on the resources of about 1,9oo local offices throughout the Nation to provide needed services.
Local employment offices made greater use of current labor supply information, developed by USES, in interarea recruitment for more intelligent direction of clearance orders and for positive (on-the-spot) recruitment in areas of labor supply.
Convention placement service was provided for 11 national professional organizations with a total membership of more than 128,ooo.
Applicants served included political scientists, psychiatrists, social welfare workers, administrators, economists, statisticians, pharmacists, teachers, and anthropologists.
Procedures governing the treatment of discriminatory job orders from employers were revised to provide that such orders be reported to fair employment practice authorities lacking enforcement power as well as to those which have such power.
Further, the Bureau directed State agencies to cooperate with such authorities by providing information relevant to fair employment practices, developed through employment security operations.
The number of minority groups representatives appointed to State agency administrative staffs was increased from 9 to 24.
These staff members are responsible for leadership and direction of the employment service program for minority groups, interpretation of that program to the community, and promotion of maximum utilization of minority workers.
To stimulate increased entry of Negroes into occupations formerly denied them, the employment service participated in a series of regional conferences with presidents and executives of predominantly Negro colleges.
The college officials were offered the assistance of the employment service in solving problems involved in the development of trained manpower to enter the new professional and technical jobs and in placing their graduates and students.
To assure minority group members an equal opportunity to acquire training provided under Federal legislation, the employment service included, in its regulations and procedures governing the selection of trainees, specific prohibitions against selection and referral for training on the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin.
The public employment service cooperated with the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity to insure compliance by Federal contract holders with the terms of Executive Order 1o925 banning discrimination in employment with respect to such contracts, and also to promote equal employment opportunity through the Plans for Progress and the Union Program for Fair Practices.
These two programs provide for the voluntary participation of employers and unions in furthering equal employment opportunity.
During fiscal year 1963, local employment service offices registered nearly 3.3 million youth under 22 years of age and placed about 1.5 million in nonfarm jobs.
They registered 134,ooo more job applicants under 2o years of age than in fiscal year 1962.
State agencies gave increased attention to improving the qualifications of staff to provide services, and standards were developed by the Bureau for use in selecting counselors and youth specialists.
A State supervisor of youth services was appointed in each State to provide overall guidance to the youth program.
Also, 2o large metropolitan areas designated area coordinators of service to youth.
Emphasis was given to out-service training of State agency staff in colleges and universities, and new training materials were developed by USES for use by State and local office staffs.
An estimated audience of over 4o million viewed the employment-oriented film drama "When I'm Old Enough, Goodbye!"
The film, directed to potential school dropouts, was developed by the Bureau in cooperation with the New York State agency.
Available on loan through State employment services to schools, parent-teacher groups, and local TV stations, the film won an American Film Festival blue ribbon award.
Some schools which showed the film reported a reduction of from 33 to 75 percent in dropout rates in the school term ended June 1963 as compared with the year before.
Local employment offices had arrangements with local school systems in 47 States whereby the schools referred actual and potential dropouts to the offices or provided names of the young people.
In the school year 1961-62, more than 49,00o dropouts were registered by local employment offices in this special program, and nearly half of them were placed in jobs.
Youths constituted about a fourth of all persons enrolled in training courses established under the Manpower Development and Training Act.
Nearly half of all initial counseling interviews held in fiscal year 1963 were with youths.
In the 1961-62 school year, employment service offices wotked with seniors in 10,6oo high schools, an increase over 196o–61 of more than 70o schools.
In hundreds of communities, employment service representatives participated in community planning and action programs, such as apprenticeship information centers, career guidance and job clinics, summer jobfinding programs, services to youths paroled from correctional institutions, and work experience-education programs.
Two demonstration projects to determine what could be accomplished by an allout effort to resolve youth employment problems in concert with community groups were begun in 1962 and continued in 1963, in Newark, N.J., and St. Louis, Mo.
Preliminary indications were that significantly greater numbers of youths were using employment service facilities, and more were being placed in jobs.
A booklet, "Youth in the St. Louis Labor Market," was published in connection with the St. Louis project.
It provides information about hiring patterns of youths; it should be useful to employment service and school counselors and to employers.
A study of school dropouts in Detroit, Mich., begun in May 1962 by the Michigan Employment Security Commission and the USES in cooperation with the Detroit Board of Education, continued throughout fiscal year 1963.
This study was designed to locate school dropouts from two city high schools having high dropout rates, to determine the cost and problems involved, and to provide appropriate employment services.
The project, hopefully, will provide information to aid youths in making the transition from school to work.
The Bureau's Veterans Employment Service, through its veterans employment representatives, cooperates with State employment security agencies to insure that special job placement services are provided for war veterans.
The more than 22 million veterans in civilian life constitute about half of all men in the labor force.
During fiscal year 1963, more than 1.5 million applications for work at local employment service offices were filed by veterans, and more than 1.1 million nonfarm placements of veterans were made.
While veterans comprised only 23.4 percent of male applicants, they accounted for 30.5 percent of all male nonfarm placements during the fiscal year.
This placement ratio was approximately the same as that prevailing in the previous few years, although veterans as a group were becoming older and were encountering employment difficulties.
In 1963, one out of three veterans was over 45 years of age.
Disabled veterans are given preference in job placement by employment service offices.
Although this group accounted for only 37.1 percent of the 355,2oo new job applications from male handicapped persons in fiscal year 1963, almost half (47.5 percent) of the 211,80o nonfarm placements of male handicapped workers were for disabled veterans.
A sample survey taken during fiscal year 1963 indicated that veterans constituted more than a third of all men enrolled in courses established under the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962.
State veterans employment representatives made 4,65o visits to local employment offices during fiscal year 1963 to insure that veterans were receiving adequate employment assistance.
Increased employment service efforts on behalf of older workers in fiscal 1963 resulted in more than 1,312,400 nonfarm placements of workers aged 45 years and over, an increase of 3 percent over fiscal 1962.
More than 135,100 applicants aged 45 and over received counseling, an increase of 2 percent over fiscal 196z.
In addition, group guidance sessions, staff clinics, and specialized "self-help" group sessions were used to assist older jobseekers in overcoming attitudes which interfere with successful job search or referral to training.
Two employer institutes on employment of workers over 4o years of age were conducted by the Little Rock area employment office in cooperation with the local advisory council.
USES provided technical assistance.
The institutes gave employers an opportunity to learn from each other how best to utilize the skills and knowledge of unemployed older workers.
A number of employers modified their hiring practices to employ more older workers as a result of these institutes.
Special services provided in all States to workers facing age discrimination in employment included testing, job counseling, and selection and referral assistance in relation to both training and employment opportunities; and educational and informational efforts were focused on employers and community groups to change negative attitudes, correct misconceptions, and eliminate bias and prejudice in the hiring of older workers.
The bulk of trainees under the Area Redevelopment Act were in age groups in which family responsibilities fall most heavily.
Over threefourths were between 19 and 44 years of age.
About 1 in 1o enrollees was 45 years of age or older.
Least represented among ARA enrollees were those under the age of 19; they constituted about 8 percent of the total.
Among older trainees under the Manpower Development and Training Act program, nearly one-third were 35 years of age and over, while slightly more than one-tenth were at least 45 years of age.
State employment security agencies urged employers to relax their age specifications so that more older workers could be referred to training projects with adequate assurance of job placement upon completion of courses.
The Bureau and State employment security agencies initiated a study of employer attitudes and age restrictions in job orders in eight major cities (Indianapolis, Louisville, Baltimore, Kansas City, Albuquerque, Memphis, Houston, and Salt Lake City) during May and June 1963.
The findings of the surveys will be available in the fall of 1963.
The focus of employment services to the physically handicapped, mentally restored, and retarded during fiscal 1963 was on direct services to job applicants, improving relationships with cooperating agencies, job promotional activities with employers and labor organizations, and public informational and educational activities.
State employment services received about 463,25o new applications from handicapped jobseekers—a 5 percent increase over the previous year—and made 272,425 placements.
More than 5,000 of the new applicants were rehabilitated clients referred to the employment service by vocational rehabilitation agencies for placement help.
During the same period, counseling service was provided to 164,300 applicants.
Cooperation with the Vocational Rehabilitation Administration, the U.S. Civil Service Commission, and the Veterans' Administration was an important phase of the employment service program to improve counseling and placement services to the handicapped in fiscal year 1963.
The employment service staff of the Bureau and of the States also worked closely with the President's Committee on Employment of the Handicapped and with State and local committees to develop a better climate for the placement of the handicapped.
Counseling and testing activities were accelerated as a result of programs under the Manpower Development and Training Act and the Area Redevelopment Act and because of the rising number of youths and women entering the labor market.
About 1,218,ooo individuals received counseling service in fiscal year 1963, nearly 5o,ooo more than a year earlier, and approximately 2,300,000 applicants received testing services, 123,000 more than in the preceding fiscal year.
The total in each instance was far higher than in any previous year.
Increased attention was given to evaluation of the supervision of counseling and testing services.
USES prepared comprehensive outlines for use in evaluation of the quality and quantity of these services at both State and local levels.
In addition, Bureau staff reviewed counseling and testing activities in several States.
To insure that high quality counseling service was provided at the local office level, approximately 63o State employment service counselors were enrolled in out-service training courses at universities during the fiscal year.
Forty-six of the State and Territorial jurisdictions established, or were committed to establish, separate State civil service or merit system classification for counselors.
The standards were developed by USES.
USES provided procedures for use by State employment services in the counseling, testing, selection, and referral of prospective trainees under the Manpower Development and Training Act and the Area Redevelopment Act.
Continued progress was made in preparation of a system to translate attributes of counseled applicants into the occupational groupings of the new "Dictionary of Occupational Titles" to make them more useful in counseling.
The 1.5 million visits to nonfarm employers made by local employment office personnel in fiscal year 1963 represented the second highest total in 1o years.
In addition, more than 2.1 million telephone contacts were made with employers.
About 975,oo employers used the placement facilities of the employment service during fiscal year 1963, compared with 900,000 in fiscal 1962.
To keep employment services geared to the needs of employers, USES and State employment services must keep pace with, and anticipate, the manpower aspect of technological developments and industrial changes.
In fiscal year 1963, efforts were made to obtain from employers more comprehensive information on manpower problems resulting from skill obsolescence, and assistance was given in developing and implementing a system of"early warning" of impending technological changes.
Cooperative relations were developed with local personnel groups to resolve significant community manpower problems.
The USES established an organizational unit during the year to develop, on both national and local levels, techniques and procedures to improve working relations with unions and to provide more effective service to union members.
Representatives visited officials of eight international labor unions to describe the facilities and services available to their membership through the employment service and to encourage collaborative placement efforts.
USES officials visited management executives of 32 multistate companies and 34 national associations to help resolve manpower problems.
Cooperation was extended to the Post Office Department, the Internal Revenue Service, and the General Services Administration in the development of programs to broaden and strengthen their working relationships with the public employment service.
Arrangements were made for local employment offices to cooperate with community groups and employers to obtain work for 675 foreign students who needed summer employment in order to continue their education in this country.
The first results were obtained from special USES demonstration projects which were undertaken to reveal manpower problems resulting from automation and technological change, and the action phase of the projects was concluded by seven State agencies (Nebraska, Oklahoma, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Utah, New Jersey, and Colorado).
These demonstration projects were aimed at improving the performance of the local employment service office in a labor market that appears to be changing at an accelerating rate.
The projects dealt with mass layoffs as a result of automation; hard-core (26-week) unemployed in areas or industries where automation has had a large impact; lengthening layoff periods in seasonal industries; change in the nature of work and consequent shifts in occupations and entry jobs; and statewide efforts to alert local offices to specific local problems, small and large.
In addition to providing guidance for these projects, the USES established a national reporting system to get early warning on nonseasonal layoffs of 1oo or more workers for more than 4 weeks, with emphasis on specific local office plans to meet the situation.
Also, it requested State agencies to have job analysts and employer relations representatives provide warning of impending automation, and conducted special studies on manpower problems associated with automation and technological change, including experience of other countries, employer hiring policies, preferences and practices, employer efforts to cushion the impact of change on present work force, and impact of new devices and systems on managerial and supervisory occupations.
It provided guidance for on-the-job training provisions of the Manpower Development and Training Act and the Trade Expansion Act.
From all these activities flowed a mass of data, operational and statistical, on which analysis was started.
Preliminary findings indicated that (1) automation had cost jobs, sometimes in obscure, hard-to-trace ways, but especially in the drying up of entry jobs; (2) purely defined, total automation had not happened although departments or processes had been automated; (3) use of automatic machines had accelerated as managers observed advantages in quality, pace, cost, elimination of human drudgery, possibility of small but economical production runs, and continuous machine use; (4) good management practices did cushion the shock of job loss for workers emotionally locked to a job; () skill levels did not change much, and current staff was used without much retraining; and (6) job loss fell in most cases to those least able to cope with it—frequently workers with onemachine, one-employer experience who had never been out of work before and were, in most cases, older and less educated than the "normal" jobseeker.
These projects and related programs provided information about changes in jobs and occupations and gave guidance as to when and how the employment service should offer its services to workers displaced, or to be displaced, by automation and technological change or to those experiencing persistent unemployment.
The Federal-State employment security system and vocational education agencies worked together in establishing institutional training projects under the Area Redevelopment Act and the Manpower Development and Training Act to provide occupational training for unemployed and underemployed persons who could not otherwise reasonably be expected to obtain appropriate full-time employment.
The Area Redevelopment Act provides for training of workers located in redevelopment areas only, while the Manpower Development and Training Act is designed to assist unemployed workers regardless of locality.
Another major difference between the two acts is that the maximum training time permissible under the ARA is 16 weeks compared with 52 weeks under the MDTA.
Responsibilities of the Federal-State employment security system in implementing training provisions of the Area Redevelopment Act include area labor market analyses on which the designation of eligible areas is based, analyses of training needs, selection and referral of individuals to training, and payment of subsistence allowances to eligible trainees.
It is responsible also for job development and for job placement of ARA trainees.
Selection of individuals for ARA training involves two major considerations: Priority must be accorded those who are most disadvantaged in today's labor market—the so-called "hard-core"unemployed—and consideration must be given to an individual's capacity to benefit from the training and his probable ability to obtain employment and perform satisfactorily on the job upon completion of training.
Employment services, including counseling and testing, are used to select the best qualified individuals for ARA training.
By the end of June 1963, State employment services had conducted nearly 55,ooo screening and counseling interviews and had administered more than 18,ooo aptitude and proficiency tests to prospective ARA trainees.
More than 9,ooo trainees were enrolled in ARA training courses in fiscal vear 1963.
Of these and the more than 3,ooo trainees who were carried over from the previous fiscal year, nearly 9,ooo completed their training during the year.
About 7o percent of these graduates obtained employment, mostly in training-related occupations.
During the fiscal year, 317 projects to provide ARA training to 13,900 individuals were approved by the Secretary of Labor, bringing the total number of projects to 48o and the total number of trainees to 23,ooo since the beginning of the program.
By the end of June 1963, ARA training had been made available to eligible residents of 42 States, American Samoa, and Puerto Rico.
During the year, USES, in cooperation with State employment services in Rhode Island, Indiana, Michigan, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Wisconsin, and six colleges and universities, started work on a followup study of a selected group of ARA graduate trainees.
The study was designed to determine, for a group of training courses selected at random, the extent of improvement in the labor market position of the trainees, and to identify factors which contributed to the success of the training program.
The study will be completed in the fall of 1964.
Under the Manpower Development and Training Act, some 1,5oo projects for about 57,7oo trainees had been approved in 49 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands by the end of fiscal year 1963.
Allowance and training cost estimates for these projects totaled about $71 million, according to preliminary reports, with nearly two-thirds earmarked for expenditure in fiscal r964.
Preliminary data indicated that by June 30, 1963, over 30,o0o trainees, more than half of the approved trainee total, had already started training in about 1,075 projects.
About 70 percent of the 6,300 trainees who had completed MDTA courses through mid-May had obtained employment as of June 30, almost wholly in training-related occupations.
State employment services accounted for 8 out of 1o job placements among these trainees.
More than three-fifths of the MDTA trainees were men.
With MDTA programs focused on meeting the needs of primary wage earners, over three-fourths of the men and about two-fifths of the women were heads of families or households.
About three-fourths of the men obtained employment after completion of training, as compared with close to three-fifths of the women.
Nearly half of the MDTA trainees were drawn from the ranks of the long-term unemployed, i.e., unemployed for 15 weeks or more.
Nearly one-fifth of the trainees had been jobless for 52 weeks or more.
Although the long-term unemployed had somewhat more difficulty in obtaining employment, even after successful completion of training, than those who had had a shorter span of joblessness, MDTA training appeared to contribute significantly to relatively sizable job placement rates among these workers.
About 4 out of every 1o of the MDTA trainees had not completed high school; I out of 1o had only a grade school education or less.
Successful completion of MDTA courses appeared to help in reducing trainee placement difficulties regardless of previous level of education.
Generally, older MDTA trainees experienced greater difficulty in finding jobs than trainees in younger age groups; however, MDTA programs appeared to contribute appreciably to relatively high placement rates in all age brackets.
Nearly three-tenths of the MDTA trainees were approved for training in skilled occupations, over one-fourth semiskilled, and close to one-fourth in clerical and sales occupations.
Principal occupations in which training was approved included general machine operators, automobile mechanics, stenographers, typists, clerk-typists, licensed practical nurses, welders, auto body repairmen, aircraft subassemblers, electronics mechanics, solderers, nurse aides, and orderlies.
Through June 30, 1963, in connection with the selection of unemployed persons for training, local public employment offices conducted about 345,00o screening interviews and 98,00o counseling interviews, administered 57,700 General Aptitude Test Batteries, 55,200 specific aptitude tests, and 6,2oo proficiency tests.
During the year, local offices referred more than 39,o0o individuals to MDTA training.
In the majority of the Nation's larger communities, local public employment offices during fiscal year 1963 cooperated with development organizations to retain existing industries, to assist those desiring to expand, and to attract new employers to the area.
A preliminary review of a national survey indicated that local employment offices were cooperating with three-fourths of the more than 4,ooo organizations (concerned with community development) which were in existence in 1963.
As a part of its regular operations, a local employment office obtains information on employment trends, unemployment problems, demandsupply relationships, occupational shortages and surpluses, and manpower requirements and resources.
Because of the availability of such data, the local office is usually the first agency to recognize existing or developing employment problems and to alert the community to them.
Helping community leaders to understand and anticipate the consequence of economic and technological changes on the local labor market is a basic function of the community employment program.
The program provides for USES participation in community employment development organizations by assigning local office representatives to serve as members of, or manpower consultants to, such organizations.
In this way, the total resources of the local office are made available to the local group in the development of programs to prevent or alleviate unemployment.
The smaller communities program has proved to be an effective vehicle for the extension of employment services to rural counties remote from existing public employment offices.
The demand from such areas for employment services was met in some States by smaller communities mobile teams, composed of State employment service personnel who move from one rural county to another at the invitation of local employment office managers and community leaders.
During fiscal year 1963, techniques were developed to assist the mobile team in counseling and testing rural people, particularly youths; in placing individuals in available jobs; and in preparing an inventory of the occupational potential of the local work force for use by the community in attracting new industry.
This information was used also in determining training needs and training potentialities for ARA and MDTA training programs.
The inventory program provided local offices with detailed occupational information on thousands of individuals who previously had not been in contact with the employment service.
Services were provided to 33 rural areas in 1o States in fiscal year 1963.
A total of 27 States indicated an interest in initiating the smaller communities program in fiscal year 1964.
During fiscal year 1963, plans were developed for a "built-in" manpower readiness in those geographic areas which will be most likely to feel the manpower impact of an enemy attack on this country.
The major technique used in the project is the identification of already-functioning groups of workers with peacetime missions closely related to the type of survival activity for which there is likely to be a demand.
Other arrangements included agreements between employers and employees to insure their immediate availability for emergency assignment and for any necessary training, including the reorientation of their activity toward a postattack environment.
General orientation programs were provided by the Bureau for 436 foreign visitors to acquaint them with the role of the United States Employment Service and the Unemployment Insurance Service in the American labor market.
About 1oo of the participants visited local employment offices to observe how services were provided to workers and employers.
Intensive programs of 3- to 12-month duration were developed for 30 employment service technicians from 11 different countries.
These participants, under grants from the Agency for International Development or the International Labor Organization, were specialists who came to learn U.S. techniques in such functions as labor market analysis, selection and placement, counseling, occupational analysis, and manpower planning.
Two technical manuals, "Techniques for Determining Manpower Skill Needs and Training Requirements" and "Demographic Techniques for Manpower Planning in Developing Countries," were completed for the Agency for International Development and were distributed to AID missions throughout the world.
Improvement of the organization and management of the public employment offices in the 55 largest metropolitan areas continued to be of major concern.
Technical work concerned with this improvement was continued in 41 of these areas in fiscal year 1963 and was started in 1o other areas.
Although the rate of progress in reorganization during 1963 was limited by budget considerations, a systematic program was undertaken of assisting State agencies in the review of metropolitan area local office operations.
During the first year of this program, reviews were made in 5 of the 55 largest metropolitan areas.
A continuing plan of action to increase the effectiveness of management and operations of public employment services was launched with Bureau evaluations of one agency's State office and two large local offices.
Technical assistance and training were provided the State agency in correcting deficiencies found through the evaluations.
In connection with the overall improvement program, a "Handbook of Local Office Organization," the first of a series relating to State administration and local office management, was completed during fiscal year 1963, and development was started of some of the other handbooks in this series, including evaluation, planning, and supervision.
The third edition of the "Dictionary of Occupational Titles" (DOT) will provide current information on jobs in the U.S. economy.
By yearend, 97 percent of the editing of job definitions was completed; outlines of the new classification structure were organized; and so percent of the individual jobs were classified.
Volume I contains job definitions of several thousand new jobs and many changes which have occurred in jobs since the 1949 edition of the DOT.
The definitions reflect alterations in occupational techniques resulting from recent changes in industry and in industrial processes.
Volume II contains the new classification structure which provides two arrangements of occupations to be reflected in a single code system to serve the needs of placement and counseling.
A conversion table relates the present and the new classification systems.
The new Dictionary should be available for use early in fiscal 1965.
An intensive industry-by-industry survey of jobs was made by the eight occupational analysis field centers in California, the District of Columbia, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, North Carolina, Washington, and Wisconsin, to determine the existence of, and to provide current analyses for, all jobs.
A major effort was started to keep currently abreast of the continuous job changes taking place in industry.
In addition, a number of new projects were started in fiscal year 1963 to provide job information to meet specific needs: a study to determine the nature and extent of job information needed in providing placement services to professional workers; a study to determine the effects of automation on the job structure of an industry—printing and publishing, and others; and a project to update job descriptions for "Occupations in Electronic Data-Processing Systems," originally published in 1959.
Programed training materials for analysis of physical demands and working conditions requirements of jobs were completed and tested by the training of about so staff members.
The test demonstrated the superiority of the new method over the lecture-type training process formerly used.
To meet increasing demand for test-selected workers with potentialities for learning occupational skills, USES accelerated research in the development of aptitude test batteries.
This research, conducted in cooperation with employers, trade associations, unions, and joint apprenticeship committees, included occupations for which training courses were established under the Manpower Development and Training Act and the Area Redevelopment Act, as well as occupations requiring formal apprenticeship and those which had emerged as a result of technological changes.
In all, new USES aptitude test batteries based on the General Aptitude Test Battery were developed for 5o occupations, including occupations in the personal service and automatic data processing fields and in the air transportation and iron and steel industries.
Research was undertaken on other occupations, including those in the atomic energy field and electronics and printing industries.
Greater use was made of the Spanish edition of the USES General Aptitude Test Battery (BGPA—Bateria General de Pruebas de Aptitud) to meet needs of Cuban refugee centers and employment service offices throughout the country.
To permit its more efficient use, test research on cultural effects was undertaken which will entail the testing of approximately 1,00o employed persons in Puerto Rico.
In the United States, in response to demand for use of the General Aptitude Test Battery for educational-vocational counseling of students in lower high school grades and for use with dropouts from these grades, USES initiated a series of studies in 1958 to determine (1) effects of maturation upon aptitude scores during the highschool years, and (2) relationship between scores on the GATB taken in lower high school grades and subsequent performance in high school and in occupations and college 2 years after high school graduation.
During fiscal year 1963, progress was made in analysis of data for the maturation and high school followup studies, and data collection continued for occupational and college followup studies.
The 19 State employment security agencies participating in the studies were successful in identifying the employer or the college attended by individuals in the sample 2 years after high school graduation.
A study was begun during fiscal 1963 to determine usefulness of 9th and roth grade norms on the GATB for predicting performance in vocational high school printing training and in printing occupations after high school graduation.
Data for the study are being collected in four high schools in three States.
This study should serve as a basis for extension to other vocational areas.
Work progressed on a complete revision being made of the USES typing, dictation, and spelling proficiency tests which are administered to more than 6oo,ooo persons each year.
Six forms of a new 5-minute typing test were released for operational use in local employment service offices.
Separate norms for manual and electric typewriters were developed for the new test.
Work also continued on development of new dictation test forms.
Preliminary work was completed on development of a written proficiency test for electronic technician jobs.
Greater use was made in fiscal year 1963 of area labor market information collected as a part of the operations of the employment security program.
A major factor in this expanded use was passage of the Public Works Acceleration Act which authorized the expenditure of $goo million in Federal funds for initiation and acceleration of public works projects in redevelopment areas and in areas designated by the Secretary of Labor as having had substantial unemployment for 9 of the preceding 12 months.
Requests were received from Members of Congress, the Area Redevelopment Administration, and other Federal agencies, State and local officials, community development groups, and civic organizations for special area labor market surveys to determine eligibility for assistance.
Reports on such surveys were submitted by State employment security agencies for about 45o additional labor market areas during fiscal 1963.
Of these, 112 were recommended by the Secretary of Labor as eligible for designation under both the Public Works Acceleration Act and the Area Redevelopment Act.
More than 2oo other areas were recommended for designation under the accelerated public works program alone.
In connection with the annual review required under the Area Redevelopment Act, some 28 areas were recommended for termination of eligibility under ARA.
At the beginning of the fiscal year, 51 major areas and 198 smaller areas were classified as "areas of substantial unemployment."
Unemployment was persistent in 19 of these major areas and 1o4 of the smaller areas.
In addition, a total of 394 very small areas had been identified as having 'substantial and persistent unemployment.
All areas with persistent unemployment problems were recommended to the Department of Commerce for designation as redevelopment areas.
The number of substantial unemployment areas declined during the year to 39 major areas (17 persistent) and 174 smaller areas (102 persistent) in June 1963.
Among areas moving to a moderate unemployment rating was the key automotive center of Detroit—the first time this area was off the substantial unemployment listing since 1957.
The list of "very small areas" of substantial and persistent unemployment expanded during the year to a total of 469 by June 1963.
Additions to this list are based in part on the extent to which such areas are called to the attention of the USES for special surveys and do not necessarily reflect a recent worsening of the local unemployment situation.
The following table compares the yearend (June 1963) classifications of 150 major labor market areas with those for May 1963 and June 1962.
The USES area classifications are also used to assign special preference to areas of high unemployment in the award of Federal procurement contracts under Defense Manpower Policy (DMP) No. 4.
Such preference resulted in the award of defense contracts—which would otherwise have gone elsewhere—to firms located in areas with high unemployment in the amount of $78.5 million during the first three quarters of fiscal year 1963 (fourthquarter data not yet available).
In all, areas of substantial unemployment received close to $17 billion in defense contracts during this period.
Firms in areas with relatively persistent unemployment are also eligible for assistance in the form of Small Business Administration loans at reduced interest rates.
During fiscal 1963, the manpower phases of 79 overall economic development plans (comprehensive analyses made by redevelopment area committees of local assets, needs, and the means for achieving economic recovery) were reviewed in detail.
The total number of these plans ieviewed since passage of the Area Redevelopment Act was thus increased to 143.
A special report procedure was developed during the year to provide bimonthly information to ARA on current employment and labor requirements in firms receiving or directly benefiting from ARA loans and grants.
Nearly 16,600 workers were employed in June 1963 in 160 firms benefiting from ARA assistance.
These firms were expected to employ 53,2oo workers when in full operation.
The "Guide to Local Occupational Information" published early in fiscal 1963 provided a ready reference to local guides and area skill surveys completed since 1956.
It stimulated efforts among State agencies to expand the preparation of individual occupational guides which present information on job duties, employment opportunities, training and experience requirements, methods of entry and promotional opportunities, and wages and working conditions in particular labor markets.
Area skill surveys, analyzing current and future demand and supply for an entire area, by occupation, were completed by 16 States for 25 labor market areas during the fiscal year.
By yearend, a total of 145 skill surveys had been completed since the program's initiation in 1956.
Counselors, school administrators, and industry and other community leaders utilize these surveys as a guide to manpower planning.
A variation on the area skill survey, the training needs survey, was developed during the year to meet the needs of MDTA and ARA training programs.
The 1963-64edition of'Job Guide for Young Workers" was well received.
Issued in March 1963, the entire first run for the Bureau of 45,000—the largest ever published—was exhausted before the end of the fiscal year, and an additional 25,ooo copies were sold directly through thc Government Printing Office.
To meet the expected demand for 1964, a new printing of 1s,ooo copies was ordered.
The guide provides information for more than 1oo entry occupations frequently held by young people with a high school education or less, and contains data on the duties and characteristics of each job, qualifications required, employment prospects, advancement opportunities, and methods of entry.
The President's Committee to Appraise Employment and Unemployment Statistics (Gordon Committee) cited absence of a series on unfilled jobs as one of the more conspicuous gaps in our labor force information.
Exploration into the feasibility of developing job vacancy data was launched and will be continued during fiscal 1964.
Vacancy data can provide economic insights, aid in determining local training needs, and help in job counseling and placement.
Manpower surveys were prepared for the missiles, spacecraft, and aircraft industry and the footwear industry.
These studies, based largely on establishment reports submitted by State employment security agencies, reviewed employment trends, economic outlook, and other significant manpower developments within the industries.
The missile, spacecraft, and aircraft survey—the fourth of a series on the aerospace industry—became one of the Nation's principal sources of manpower information covering about zo industries engaged in aerospace work.
Three other surveys—bituminous coal mining, department stores, and tires and tubes—were in final draft at fiscal yearend.
The scope of the industry manpower survey program at the close of the fiscal year was being expanded considerably to meet increasing need for more detailed industry-occupational information on manpower development and automation impact.
Supplemental questionnaires were designed for special industries scheduled for survey in the first half of fiscal year 1964 to determine the impact of technological change on the industries' occupational composition, occupational opportunities for on-the-job training, and extent to which workers displaced fiom the industries participated in MDTA and ARA training programs.
More than 5o special studies were undertaken by 25 State employment security agencies during the fiscal yeai to provide labor market information needed for policy formulation, program planning, and evaluation.
These studies included analyses of local employment office data on characteristics of, and services provided to, jobseekers; services to individual firms in terms of results obtained with respect to job orders received and placements made; channels used by workers to obtain jobs and channels through which employers recruit workers; and new hires and placements, by size of firm and industry.
A monthly report was developed during the year to analyze employment service activities in depth and to present information on labor market conditions affecting the employment service program.
Farm placement and related services are provided by the employment security agencies of the 5o States, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
In fiscal year 1963, the Office of Farm Labor Service in the Bureau of Employment Security was reorganized as a full operating service, reporting direct to the Bureau Administrator.
During the year, the Bureau and State employment security agencies concentrated their efforts in farm labor service on more effective utilization of domestic agricultural workers, improving living and working conditions of migratory farmworkers, reducing need for supplemental foreign workers, and preventing adverse effect on the wages and working conditions of domestic farmworkers in areas where Mexican and other imported foreign workers were used.
To accomplish these objectives, the annual worker plan was strengthened to provide continuous employment for intra-area and out-of-area workers; efforts were made to improve working and living conditions (housing, wages, transportation) for migrant farmworkers; and improvements were made in selecting workers for out-of-area referral at peak crop seasons, in collecting and validating employment and wage information, and in certification procedures for the admittance of aliens seeking permanent entry under the Immigration and Nationality Act.
The continuing rapid advance of technology and farm mechanization had a significant effect on recruitment of agricultural workers.
It disrupted established migratory patterns, decreased the demand for seasonal farmworkers, and made employers more demanding with respect to workers' skills.
It highlighted the importance of training unskilled workers displaced as a result of the technological revolution in agriculture—for higher skilled jobs.
Total agricultural employment continued its long decline—averaging 5.0 million per month in fiscal year 1963, compared with 5.4 million the previous year, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The 1963 total included 1.7 million hired farmworkers, approximately the same as in the previous year.
Decreases were reported in the number of farm operators and unpaid family workers, who totaled 2.5 million and 9oo,o0o, respectively, compared with 2.7 million and 1.o million in 1962.
The same technological advances which have been responsible for declining farm employment in the past were at work in fiscal year 1963.
For example, 7o percent of the cotton harvest was handled by machine, compared with 59 percent the year before.
Also, greatly increased use was made of chemical sprays to kill grass and weeds in row crops.
These and other changes in production methods eliminated thousands of seasonal jobs or shortened periods of employment.
The rate of unemployment in agriculture ranged as high as 19 percent during the year, substantially higher than in nonagricultural industries in all except peak harvesting months.
Those recruited by local employment offices for farm jobs ranged from year-round workers to migrants, from urban youth to housewives, and from reservation Indians to Puerto Rican contract laborers.
As a part of their service to agricultural employers and to relieve potential labor shortages, public employment offices also provided information service and assistance in planning schedules to operators of custom grain combines and mechanical cottonpickers.
Further reflecting the rapid technological change in agriculture, local employment offices reported a total of 7,923,543 farm job placements in fiscal year 1963, down more than a million from the 9,o28,451 total for the year before.
During 1963, local office staff made 401,717 visits to agricultural employers; increased referrals of registered applicants selected from the files; registered more workers for migrant labor jobs; and curtailed mass referrals of unregistered applicants.
Although use of farmworkers from local sources increased in 1963, recruitment of labor through the intrastate and interstate clearance system continued to be a large-scale activity.
In California alone, more than 6o,ooo nonlocal domestic farmworkers were employed in a single month.
Better utilization of local labor was reflected in increased day-haul operations, a method by which local labor is transported to farm jobs on a daily basis.
In calendar year 1962, the number of workers transported on peak days through day-haul activities reached nearly 32o,o0o.
An "established" day-haul pickup point is one that is set up but is not supervised by the State employment security agency; an "operated" dayhaul pickup point is both set up and supervised by the agency.
While the number of towns with State-operated day-hauls decreased slightly to 717 in 1962, the number of established day-haul points increased by 6o to 1,466, with an overall increase of 3,4oo persons transported on peak days.
Since 1958, the number of day-haul workers transported from established points has risen by nearly 25,ooo, reflecting better coverage of areas distant from the local office.
Agriculture as a source of employment for youth made gains during the year, and day-haul continued to be the major method for using youth in farm employment.
State agency-operated day-haul points for youth only were set up in 11 percent more towns in 1962 than in the previous year.
State agency-established day-haul points showed even greater advances.
The number of youths transported on peak days increased by 33 percent to 15,42o.
Thousands of other young people participated in joint youthadult day-hauls or were referred as workers to fill regular farm jobs for which they were qualified.
Over 2,ooo youths were placed in live-in farm jobs during vacation periods.
Live-in programs usually involved recruitment of two types of workers— city youth with no farm experience and vacationing agricultural students.
A live-in pilot project in a Colorado beet area demonstrated that youths can do as well as, if not better than, the migrants usually employed for this work.
By means of"Farm Employment Days,"local employment offices helped farmworkers wanting jobs to meet farm employers needing help.
One thousand such days were held in 1962.
Because of the growing need for individually selected skilled workers, 37 percent more offices used this device for effecting placements.
Over 35,o0o Indians from 11 States were recruited for off-reservation farmwork in 1962.
The use of Puerto Rican contract workers reached a peak of 12,9oo in August 1962, and then dwindled to insignificance from September to March.
Under agreements with the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, workers were brought in for farmwork along the Atlantic seaboard from Massachusetts to Florida, with New Jersey using the largest number of workers.
In calendar yea1 1962, a total of 10,051 migrant groups and crews, representing 176,67o individuals, were scheduled for successive farm jobs under the annual worker plan.
Group contacts increased 9 percent over 196r.
In the Florida-itinerary phase of the annual worker plan, farm labor personnel and employers from 13 States met with crew leaders for pooled interviews at designated locations and interviewed 717 groups and crews, representing 33,879 woikers.
A number of Texas crews whose work had taken them across the Gulf States to the citrus groves in Florida participated in the itinerary for the first time.
In fiscal year 1963, new procedures were adopted for identifying migrant workers by name, address, and social security number on the manifest covering each group of workers referred for interstate farm employment.
This identification, which in most cases also indicated sex of worker, provided information on labor source and potential new recruitment sources.
It was a first step in assembling information—necessary for selective placement—on individual migrants as to those who report as scheduled, perform satisfactorily, and remain on the job until it is completed.
In an effort to attract out-of-State workers to Florida to substitute for contract workers from the West Indies, Florida farm labor representatives, in a controlled experiment, went to Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, and Tennessee to recruit for the winter season.
Also, citrus growers agreed to improve working conditions.
Most farm labor information centers, which are located strategically to serve migrant workers, ieported increases in the number asking for information about farm labor demand and supply.
At the end of June 1963, a total of 8,86o migrants had passed through the Hope, Ark., information center since its opening in the spring.
This total compared with 7,468 at the same time in the previous year.
Sikeston, Mo., reported 6,o24 compared with the previous year's 5,643; Little Creek, Va., reported a slight drop 13,799 compared with 13,935 in 1962.
Continued attention was given during the year to implementing the Secretary's regulations (2o CFR 6o2.9) relating to the use of public employment service facilities in the interstate recruitment of agricultural workers, to insure that wages offered were no less than those found prevailing among workers similarly employed within the area of employment.
The Bureau worked with State employment security agencies to insure consideration of employer and worker complaints relating to these regulations.
A number of States passed legislation to improve housing, transportation, and other living and working conditions affecting migratory workers.
Pilot programs in Elizabeth City and Hendersonville, N.C., which were being carried on by cooperating Federal agencies concerned with providing improved services to migratory workers and their families, completed the first year of operation, and services were expanded.
The Bureau participated with State employment security agencies, and other Federal agencies and offices, in developing programs under the Manpower Development and Training Act and the Area Redevelopment Act to train unemployed and underemployed rural workers for both farm and nonfarm occupations.
The occupations for which such workers were trained included farm machinery operation and maintenance, vineyard and tree pruner, general farmhand, dairy hand, forester aid, cattle rancher, and irrigator.
By the end of the fiscal year, a total of 95 such projects, with 2,075 trainees, had been approved by the Bureau.
In the first training class composed exclusively of migrant farmworkers' one group was trained to be general farmhands; the other, combination welders.
The Office of Farm Labor Service made a nationwide survey of the scope of agricultural mechanization and other technological activities in high labor-using crops.
The purpose of the study was to determine how the farm labor force was affected and what training should be provided for farmworkers under the Manpower Development and Training Act.
By the end of fiscal 1963, six bills on migratory labor, sponsored by Senator Harrison A. Williams, Jr. (N.J.), had passed the Senate and had been sent to the House.
The proposed legislation provided for educational opportunities, day care for children, sanitation facilities, regulation of child labor, required crew leader registration, and a national advisory council on migratory labor.
A major breakthrough in legislative action with respect to living and working conditions was made in September 1962 with the passage of the Migrant Health Act (P.L. 87-692).
Funds were appropriated by the 88th Congress to help establish family health services clinics under the act and to carry out other health projects tor migratory workers and their families.
When qualified domestic farmworkers are not available to meet peak seasonal needs of agriculture, growers may request use of foreign workers.
However, the Bureau's regional offices will not approve foreign-worker quotas for States until employment security agencies inform them that there are no available domestic workers and that the employment of the foreign workers will not affect adversely the wages and working conditions of U.S. workers.
Use of contract foreign workers as temporary supplemental labor on U.S. farms continued to decline in fiscal year 1963.
Average monthly employment of these workers, at 62,00o, was 9,000 below the previous year's average.
The greatest number reported to be working at any one time in fiscal 1963 was 127,000, about 43 percent fewer than in 1962; the lowest number was 30,200.
The decline in use of Mexican nationals which began in 1959 and continued through fiscal 1963 accounted for nearly all of the decrease in use of foreign workers.