Nineteen hundred and sixty-five was a dramatic year in the social and economic annals of the United States.
It was a year in which the Nation, armed with new statutory power to guarantee equal opportunity, proceeded with large-scale efforts to achieve equal results.
It was a year in which the Nation firmly resolved that no citizen should be denied the opportunity to share in the prosperity most take for granted.
As the economy thrust forward in the longest unbroken peacetime expansion in history, the American employment picture brightened substantially.
The economy produced the richest flow of goods and services in history and almost 2.5 million more citizens found jobs during the year.
The ranks of the unemployed dropped by 400,000, even though over 1 million more persons entered the labor force than the year before.
The jobless rate, which had stood at 7 percent in 1961, dropped below 5 percent and continued to move downward during the year.
But prosperity, as important a role as it played, was only partially responsible for the large progress made in 1965 to put more Americans to work.
Public programs, designed to upgrade the skills of an ever-growing number of people, were also proving, and quite conclusively, their value in eliminating joblessness.
In all these vital developments during this historic year, the Department of Labor played a major part in furthering the general welfare of American wage earners "to improve their working conditions, and to advance their opportunities for profitable employment."
Under the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962 and its subsequent amendments, the Department had launched comprehensive training programs to improve the employability of the Nation's jobseekers.
By 1965, the machinery of this far-reaching program was operating effectively to meet the shift toward higher skilled jobs resulting from technological change.
As the year progressed, and the Nation stepped up the pace of the war against poverty, increased attention was focused on the vital MDTA programs.
By the year's end, 9,336 training projects, offering job-training opportunities to nearly 470,000 unemployed persons, had been approved under MDTA.
Institutional programs (classroom instruction at existing vocational schools) covering over 160,000 men and women were approved.
On-the-job training increased fourfold, with 94 percent of the trainees continuing on the job after the training was completed.
Apprenticeship training also played a prominent role.
During the year, 1,208 new apprenticeship programs were developed and 6,559 apprentices received certificates of completion.
To meet the job requirements and the needs of the unemployed, existing programs had to be intensified and continually readjusted.
This called for, in part, a comprehensive research program to insure the proper direction of various manpower programs.
With enactment of the Manpower Act of 1965, the role of the Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training—whose experimental projects help shape the Department's manpower programs—became increasingly more vital.
Research programs of this Office enabled the Department to probe more deeply into the myriad problems of the jobless during fiscal 1965.
Also, special studies were conducted to compare American retraining programs with those of other countries.
In February, President Johnson established a special job development program to develop 10,000 new employment opportunities a month.
The economy, it was felt, could create job openings above and beyond those arising from the current industrial expansion.
It could define and specify its unmet work needs particularly in the service areas.
Along with the Department of Commerce, the Labor Department set about insuring a brighter employment picture through job development.
Business rose to the challenge, and within 4 months the goal in creating jobs was being not merely met, but exceeded.
In the month of June alone, 16,685 new opportunities for jobs were stimulated—jobs which could be filled by qualified MDTA trainees.
The intermeshing of Government agencies at all levels, in close cooperation with industry, labor, and private organizations, characterized much of the war on poverty.
The Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 gave to the Department of Labor responsibility for a Neighborhood Youth Corps.
School dropouts, unqualified by either education or training for jobs that required both, contributed strongly to the ranks of the unemployed.
Since technological advances promised to raise, not lower, job requirements in the future, the chances of these dropouts for future careers were slim.
Youth unemployment was no small problem.
In fiscal 1965, the labor force felt the impact of the postwar baby boom.
Already, thousands of these boys and girls reaching the brink of adult life were out of school and looking for jobs.
During the year, 236,000 more teenagers entered the work force than had the year before.
They were only the first wave.
It was estimated that by 1970 the net increase in teenagers in the work force would amount to 1½ million.
In general the economy thrived, fulfilling the wants and needs of this vast new consumer market; much of the Nation moved to the tempo and catered to the taste of the young.
But jobs were another matter.
Unemployment for young people—24 and under—was running almost 3 times as high as that for the labor force as a whole.
By sheer force of numbers, the problem of the school dropout became particularly acute, despite the fact that a lower percentage of youngsters were leaving school than they had previously.
Under MDTA, training programs had focused chiefly on the disadvantaged adult.
A new program was now needed, not only for training the young, but to encourage dropouts and potential dropouts to complete their education.
The Neighborhood Youth Corps partially filled this need.
It aimed at helping youngsters stay in or return to school by providing them with responsible jobs in their own communities.
Its purpose supplemented that of the Job Corps of the Office of Economic Opportunity, which trained youths in special work-training camps away from home.
By enabling 16- to 21-year-olds to work in constructive tasks at hospitals, libraries, schools, playgrounds, various local and State offices, and in work with other nonprofit organizations in their own communities, the Neighborhood Youth Corps provided them a chance to earn money and receive work-training for better jobs, while furthering the well-being of their own hometowns.
Part-time and full-time work was made available to those who wished to combine a work with a school schedule.
Pay averaged $1.25 an hour; it provided, for many dropouts, the financial means to return to classes.
Equally important, an NYC job was for most enrollees an introduction to both the discipline of work and the security of earning wages.
The first NYC project opened in Newark, N.J., in January.
In short order, 700 out-of-school youths in that city were at work for up to 30 hours a week.
Other projects rapidly followed.
By the end of the fiscal year, 639 Neighborhood Youth Corps projects had been approved to provide job opportunities across the Nation for 273,426 boys and girls.
Special counseling, testing, and job placement centers for young people were also established at State employment service sites.
Forty of these Youth Opportunity Centers had focused on youths' special problems by the end of the fiscal year.
Sixty-eight more were approved, with at least one to be located in a large urban area of each State.
To staff the centers and also provide other public and private organizations with qualified youth counselors, the Department initiated special summer training courses at universities and colleges.
Project CAUSE, as it was named, furnished 1,100 special counselors and counselors' aides to Youth Opportunity Centers during the year.
Other departmental programs mobilized youths for work in agriculture.
In Special A-TEAMS (Athletes in Temporary Employment as Agricultural Manpower), many American boys spent the summer working on the Nation's farms.
At the same time, growers were encouraged to improve the living and working conditions of all domestic workers and provide them with adequate wages.
Enforcement of new and existing wage regulations concerned the Department's Wage and Hour and Public Contracts Divisions.
The Divisions' responsibilities were particularly increased when on September 3, the minimum wage for an additional 3.6 million workers rose from $1 to $1.15 an hour, under Fair Labor Standards Act amendments.
Maximum hours were reduced from 44 to 42 hours a week.
Nineteen hundred and sixty-four was the first full fiscal year covered by the Equal Pay Act.
Underpayments of $156,200, affecting 960 persons, were brought to light.
Federal legislation had reaffirmed the equal rights of women to jobs and wages.
In 1965, emphasis shifted to the State level.
The Women's Bureau aided significantly in advising Governors' commissions on the status of women.
There were 44 commissions established by the end of July 1965.
For the first time, minimum wage laws were enacted in three States, equal pay laws in three States, and laws prohibiting discrimination in employment based on sex in five States and the District of Columbia.
The woman who had figured importantly in the early days of the Department— former Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins—made what was to be her last official appearance during the 30th anniversary celebration of the Bureau of Labor Standards.
Labor Standards had been established under her leadership.
The Bureau's continued insistence on safety regulations played a part in a 27 to 30 percent reduction in maritime injuries over a 5-year period, with the injury rate in longshoring dropping in 1964, for the first time, below 100 disabilities per million man-hours of work.
In the Federal service, Mission SAFETY-70, launched by the President in February, aimed at reducing injuries to Government employees 30 percent by 1970.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics also took a look into the future, with publication of projections of the labor force by age and sex to 1980.
It also completed work on the 1966-67“Occupational Outlook Handbook.
Special studies relating to timely issues included a review of the social and economic position of Negroes, special studies on manpower and productivity, studies of the older worker, and a review of collective bargaining agreements.
Unions and union elections continued to be a major interest of the Labor-Management Services Administration.
Ninety-nine elections opened during the year, and 47 carried over from the previous year.
The Office of the Solicitor helped draft major pieces of legislation, including the Fair Labor Standards Amendments of 1965, a bill to repeal section 14(b) of the Taft-Hartley Act, Employment Security Amendments of 1965, the bill on common situs picketing, and the Manpower Development and Training Act amendments.
The Wage Appeals Board concluded its frst full year with three out of five cases affirmed for action of the Solicitor, and one of these resulting in a reversal of ruling.
Deeply concerned with technological change in the United States, the Department of Labor also turned its attention to needs of the developing countries abroad.
Corps, was established in a March agreement with the Agency for International Development.
Part of the Bureau of International Labor Affairs, DOLITAC provided AID and similar organizations with help in foreign manpower planning and administration, labor statistics, labor standards, labor-management relations, and labor ministry administration.
Elsewhere, ILAB specialists served on assignments in Africa, Latin America, Europe, the Near East, and the Far East.
At home, the Department of Labor played host to some 600 foreign visitors, including 4 Ministers of Labor.
On all fronts, the Department of Labor focused on the individual requirements of individuals in need of jobs.
Never had the economy looked better.
Still the Department armed against a future in which technological change showed no signs of slackening, applied itself to the long-range task of matching every man with suitable employment.
The ideal of equal opportunity, now solidly written into the law and needing transformation into equal results, became the inspiration and driving force.
Much has been accomplished.
Much is left to do.
As the principal administrative official of the Department, the Assistant Secretary for Administration is responsible for the administrative management programs of the Department.
This responsibility includes budget preparation and presentation, financial control and audit, personnel staffing and control, provision of administrative services, library service, management analysis, and analysis and evaluation of the Department's program objectives and goals.
The Assistant Secretary is assisted by a Deputy Assistant Secretary for Administration who acts as the controller and an Assistant Assistant Secretary who serves as the Director of Personnel.
The Assistant Secretary represents the Department in all major administrative and management affairs, including relationships with the Bureau of the Budget and the Congress on appropriation matters.
During the fiscal year 1965, the Assistant Secretary gave particular emphasis to developing and implementing the program budget management system, improving all administrative management services, and executing the President's directives on cost reduction.
Guidance on budget matters is provided to all bureaus and offices of the Department.
Overall responsibility is assumed for supervising and maintaining controls over departmental resources in terms of employment and fund availability.
Appropriations and other authorizations for the Department of Labor for fiscal year 1965 totaled $1.2 billion and provided for about 9,000 positions.
Of this amount, $500 million was for normal administrative expenses, $200 million for unemployment compensation for Federal employees and ex-servicemen and injured Federal employees' claims and expenses, and $500 million for grants to States for administrative costs of the public employment security programs (see table 1).
Review and analysis of departmental programs, which have long been functions of the Assistant Secretary, were this year established within a formal organization, the Office of Program Analysis and Evaluation.
This office was created as a separate entity to intensify efforts to provide the Department with information on progress toward program goals and objectives and to give asristance in arriving at efficient and effective allocations of departmental resources.
Management analysis support is provided to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Department's administrative management programs and to assure that the Department's organizational structure remains viable and capable of accomplishing assigned programs.
The program budget management system, by means of which the Secretary and executives of the Department can weigh the relative merits of programs and their demands on manpower, funds, and other resources, was extended throughout the Department and applied to the budget proposal for fiscal year 1967.
Providing for an organized approach to planning, programing, execution, review, and analysis, the system enables the Secretary and departmental officials to consider various alternatives to programs, project costs, and resource requirements for several years in advance; to identify programs which should be curtailed or eliminated; and to weigh benefits derived from the programs against total fund and resource requirements.
A revised policy for the field organization of Labor Department programs was established.
The new policy provides that the programs will be established within common geographical boundaries with headquarters offices for each region being located in one city.
Manpower and support services were provided for several broad management studies and organizational realinements, including an interagency study of the administration of manpower development and training programs at the Federal, State, and local level, internal reviews of safety and health responsibilities, and the establishment within the Manpower Administration of a Neighborhood Youth Corps.
The management improvement and cost reduction program was revised and reestablished under policies and procedures which will make it fully responsive to the President's program for increasing the efficiency and economy of operations.
A major innovation provides for its full integration and coordination with the budgetary process.
Other features include the identification, curtailment, or elimination of low priority programs; the searching out of less costly alternatives, procedures, or methods; and the establishment of savings goals, in terms of manpower and funds, in areas where savings are considered feasible without detriment to essential missions of the Department's programs.
Accounting and auditing of expenditures of funds is provided for bureaus and offices of the Department.
Fiscal year 1965 saw significant progress toward accomplishment of the Department's major financial management goals.
All payroll operations of the Department were centralized and converted to computer operations.
A staff was established to conduct audits of financial management operations throughout the Department, to serve as the liaison point for all General Accounting Office audit reports, and to monitor the implementation of recommendations accepted by the Department.
A departmentwide computerized accounting system was developed to reflect the requirements of the program budget management system.
Personnel management is a decentralized operation.
Effective management is accomplished through policy guidance, technical assistance, and review and evaluation of administration and bureau personnel operations and service.
Greater emphasis was given during the year to improving the effectiveness of personnel policy guidance, program direction, and technical assistance provided to administrations, bureaus, and offices.
Significant progress was made in improving position management through more intensive evaluation of the need for the positions and the ways in which duties and responsibilities are organized and assigned among positions.
Special attention was given to problems of grade escalation and to changes in average grade and grade distribution.
Steps were taken during the year to make the qualification requirements for jobs in the Department more flexible and more responsive to the current needs of management.
Special efforts were directed toward qualifications required for positions in the programs for the disadvantaged.
As part of this approach, a new occupation for manpower specialists has been defined with broader experience and education requirements.
Similarly, social science training in place of the traditional economics background has been accepted for some jobs.
Greater use has been made of authorities for making excepted appointments, such as under schedule B, to acquire employees with a wide variety of experience.
In its recruiting activities, the Department continued to emphasize the selection of highly qualified candidates.
College recruiters sought students whose majors were appropriate to Department of Labor programs—economics and statistics— in visits to 66 colleges and universities throughout the country.
The Department conducted an intensive recruitment program to locate qualified, eligible minority group candidates to be considered for placement in all job classifications at all grade levels.
Visits to over 30 predominantly Negro colleges and universities resulted in the placement at the entrance level of 24 qualified junior professionals.
Intensive community contacts and executive recruiting resulted in additional placements of qualified candidates in professional positions above the entrance level.
The Department of Labor Board of U.S. Civil Service Examiners announced examinations and established registers for eight classes of positions in grades GS-9 through GS-15.
Several new utilization and development programs were established.
Of these, the Management Work Conference, an 80-hour seminar program designed to improve managerial competence, contributed significantly to management improvement objectives.
Twenty-three program managers (GS-15 and above), representing all of the major units in the Department, participated in the pilot program.
The success of this program has led to a decision to repeat it three or four times a year in the future.
Employee-management relations activities included the granting of formal or exclusive recognition to employee organizations for 11 additional units.
Five agreements were negotiated with unions representing units of field employees.
Ten agreements providing for a voluntary dues-withholding program were signed with employee unions.
An existing agreement providing for advisory arbitration of adverse actions for employees of the Washington, D.C., unit was formalized by a letter of understanding.
Employee organizations representing a substantial proportion of the Department's employees outside Washington, D.C., formed a council of local unions which was formally recognized at the national level.
Support services are provided through centralized facilities to the extent greater efficiency can be achieved.
Policy and guides are established to maintain effective control of services in both headquarters and field operations.
Liaison is maintained with other governmental agencies exercising authority in this area.
The number of building locations in the Washington, D.C., area housing programs of the Department was reduced from 16 to 12.
Related program units were placed in the same building wherever possible.
In Los Angeles and Pittsburgh, similar consolidations of field offices into one building were also accomplished.
A comprehensive renovation of 65,000 square feet of below-ground-level space in the Department of Labor Building was completed.
This former substandard storage-type area was converted to conference and training rooms to service all departmental activities, fully usable office-type space, and executive dining facilities to serve Department of Labor and Interstate Commerce Commission requirements.
A regional administrative services office was established in Atlanta, Ga., and final arrangements were made for opening offices in Kansas City, Mo., and Dallas, Tex.
The regional administrative services office in San Francisco was expanded to provide personnel management services to Department of Labor field offices in that area and was redesignated as a regional administrative office.
The Division of Services and Supply increased its efforts to provide the greatest use of surplus and rehabilitated furniture and office equipment in keeping with the Department's needs.
Equipment with an acquisition value of approximately $160,000 was so utilized.
The mechanics for maintaining a closer control on the removal of obsolete forms and publications from storage were further developed and implemented.
Plans were completed for the initiation of a comprehensive mail management program for the Department.
Additional computer planning was initiated during the fiscal year to meet anticipated increasing demands for data processing services.
Progress continued in computerizing personnel records.
The Division of Printing and Reproduction produced 86,278,000 impressions over the 12-month period.
It made significant improvements in the procedures for circularizing and using publications mailing lists, and realined duplicating operations to permit a more efficient production arrangement.
Information pertaining to labor activities is provided in support of departmental activities.
The activities of the Library accelerated sharply in response to growing demands from the Washington and field offices of the Department and the public.
The staff answered 26,655 requests; 14,378 items listed on the weekly accessions list were sent out by special request.
The total circulation was 109,315.
The cataloged collection increased by 12,905 volumes.
The Office of Information, Publications, and Reports directs all informational activities of the Labor Department.
It serves as the principal link between the Department and the public.
Its function is to disseminate to the public socioeconomic data collected by the Department and to create a public understanding of Department policies and programs.
During the 1965 fiscal year, the Office issued 444 news releases and coordinated the Department's relationship with the press, radio, television, and other communication media; answered thousands of inquiries from labor, business, and the public; and distributed weekly news packets to some 630 labor, 2,700 weekly, and 1,325 other press organizations; compiled and edited publications of departmentwide significance and reviewed those issued by the bureaus and offices for consistency with Department policy, objectives, and procedures.
The visual services division of the Office acted as visual consultant for all major departmental publications and other visual media.
Special presentations, training charts, exhibits, posters, and television spot slide films were produced from several hundred miscellaneous idea roughs, publication layouts, and format designs.
A permanent exhibit hall, depicting the history of labor and the Department and containing three dimensional replicas, full color transparencies of historic scenes, and historic mementos and artifacts, was completed.
Representatives of the Department emphasized before audiences of youths and adults the need for education and training to qualify for employment, and provided information to the public on a wide variety of subjects by participating in approximately 100 national conferences and conventions.
Each year finds the Department of Labor with an expanded role in programs to deal with problems of unemployment and job displacement, depressed areas and obsolete skills, decent wages, and safe working conditions.
The Solicitor, as the chief legal officer of the Department as well as a policy official and adviser, is responsible for the legal aspects of the Department's activities in these programs.
He advises the Secretary, Under Secretary, and Assistant Secretaries and also performs many diversified types of legal services required in the operations of the various bureaus and offices of the Department.
One of his more significant areas of responsibility is the handling of legal proceedings arising under laws administered and enforced by the Department.
He also serves as top legal adviser to the Secretary in formulating and preparing the Department's legislative programs and in his appearances before congressional committees.
In addition, the Solicitor is authorized to perform operating functions in connection with the administration and enforcement of the Davis-Bacon Act and other statutes relating to the predetermination and payment of prevailing wages on Federal and federally financed and assisted construction projects.
He is also vested with final authority with respect to tort claims arising out of the Department's activities.
The legal staff of the Solicitor in the Washington office is comprised of five divisions, with an Associate Solicitor in charge of each.
The immediate Office of the Solicitor is composed of the Solicìtor, his Deputy, and several attorneys as special assistants assigned to the handling of special legal problems.
In addition to the Washington office, a staff of attorneys is maintained in field offices throughout the continental United States and Puerto Rico, principally to carry out the litigation responsibilities of the Department.
As its title suggests, the Litigation Division is charged with the Department's litigation and quasi-litigation responsibilities, except as specifically otherwise assigned.
These functions are performed principally in connection with the enforcement of labor standards legislation (Fair Labor Standards Act, including the Equal Pay Act, and Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act), workmen's compensation legislation (Federal Employees' Compensation Act, Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, and District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Act, among others), and maritime safety legislation (Public Law 85–742, 72 Stat. 835).
One thousand four hundred and sixty-two cases were instituted this year under the Fair Labor Standards Act and Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Of the 1,413 civil actions filed, 1,351 were brought under sections 16(c) or 17 of the Fair Labor Standards Act or section 2 of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and 62 represented other civil actions.
Criminal prosecutions were instituted in 25 cases and there were 24 new administrative proceedings before hearing examiners under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
One thousand four hundred eighty-two cases were closed with payment of back wages to employees being ordered or agreed to in 583 cases.
Thirty-three criminal prosecutions and 67 contempt actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act were disposed of and 27 Walsh-Healey administrative proceedings were concluded.
Fines obtained in criminal and contempt cases totaled $103,000.
Restitution of back wages obtained through the efforts of the Office of the Solicitor during the fiscal year amounted to $4,283,456 under the Fair Labor Standards Act and $195,745 under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, for a total of $4,469,201, a new record high.
One thousand four hundred and three permanent injunctions were obtained, 1,240 of them after contest.
As in 1963 and 1964, use of a demand for the restitution of back wages in injunction cases continued at a high level and with outstanding success.
A substantial number of cases wherein it is hoped to obtain court interpretation of the Fair Labor Standards Act's provisions relating to enterprise coverage were filed, along with the first of those arising under the new equal pay provisions.
During the fiscal vear, 35 briefs were filed in appellate proceedings under the Fair Labor Standards Act and Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, 4 in the U.S. Supreme Court, 1 in a State appellate court, and the remainder in the U.S. courts of appeals for the various circuits.
Fourteen decisions were handed down by the appellate courts.
The Department's position was sustained in 11 of these, rejected in 1, and upheld in part in the remaining 2.
In addition, the Supreme Court granted two petitions for certiorari, one requested by the Department and the other unopposed.
Two petitions for certiorari opposed by the Department were denied.
The two decisions which the Supreme Court will review deal with the Fair Labor Standards Act's “retail establishment" exemption. One is Wirtz v. Steepleton General Tire Co., 330 F. 2d 804, in which the Sixth Circuit held last year that an employer selling tires and tire services to trucking companies, fleet operators, and Government agencies was entitled to this exemption. In the other, Wirtz v. Idaho Sheet Metal Works, Inc., 335 F. 2d 952, the Ninth Circuit earlier this year ruled in the Department's favor that a plant whose business consisted primarily of fabricating sheet metal equipment for processing and manufacturing companies was not an exempt "retail establishment.
Because the issues in the two cases are closely related and together afford the opportunity to obtain authoritative clarification and guidance on the application of this exemption, the Department did not oppose the employer's petition in the latter case.
One of the cases in which the Department successfully opposed the granting of certiorari was Burton Mercantile & Gin Co., Inc. v. Wirtz, 332 F. 2d 414, wherein the Eighth Circuit had held that neither clerical employees of a cotton gin, nor those performing maintenance work during the dormant season, were within the exemption for employees “engaged in ginning of cotton.
The other case in which certiorari was denied was Wirtz v. International Harvester Co., 331 F. 2d 462, where the Fifth Circuit had agreed with our contention that an unfavorable decision in the district court was based upon instructions to the jury which did not accurately state the law applicable to the case. Like Steepleton and Idaho Sheet Metal, this case involves the “retail establishment" exemption.
At the appeals court level, the Department was successful in a number of important cases.
In two of them, the Department obtained rulings contrary to prior adverse appellate precedents on the FLSA's coverage.
In Beneficial Finance Co, y.
Wirtz, 346 F. 2d 340, the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, expressly disapproving the earlier decision of the Third Circuit in Mitchell v. Household Finance Corp., 208 F. 2d 667 (1953), held that branch office employees of a nationwide small loan company are engaged both in commerce and in the production of goods for commerce and are thus subject to the act.
Similarly, declining to follow contrary holdings—in this instance decisions of the Sixth and Eighth Circuits—the court of appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in Wirtz v. Pepsi-Cola Bottling Co. of Augusta, Inc., 342 F. 2d 820, held that a bottling company's route helpers are producing goods for commerce when picking up and returning to the plant empty bottles which are later refilled and distributed to both local and out-of-State outlets.
Among other coverage decisions were holdings of the Fifth and Fourth Circuits, respectively, that the act applies to maids cleaning areas where goods, 3 to 5 percent of which go out-of-State, are prepared for shipment (Nunn's Battery & Electric Co. v. Wirtz, 335 F. 2d 599), and to employees preparing and mailing newsletters which their employer, an insurance broker, sent to both local and out-of-State recipients for promotional purposes (Wirtz v. Wardlaw, 339 F. 2d 785).
A number of successful actions related to the act's enforcement procedures.
In Wirtz v. Jones, 340 F. 2d 901, which dealt with the constitutional question whether an employer has a right to a jury trial in an injunction action where restitution of unlawfully withheld wages is sought as part of the requested equitable relief, the Fifth Circuit upheld the Department's contention that there is no such right.
Two other significant cases relating to enforcement procedures involved the scope of injunctions issued under the act.
The Beneficial Finance Co. decision, supra, in addition to its coverage ruling, held that an injunction against future violations could properly be made applicable to all of the employer's branch offices throughout the Nation, even though violations had actually been shown at only one office.
And the Fifth Circuit, in Wirtz v. Ocala Gas Company, 336 F. 2d 236, held that where an injunction under this act is in terms applicable to all covered employees of a corporation, it applies to all operations of a successor corporation owned by the same parent corporation, including the successor's expanded operations in a new city, and that contempt of court charges would lie for violations at the new location.
Another Fifth Circuit decision, Wirtz v. C&P Shoe Corp., 330 F. 2d 21, held that once the Secretary has instituted suit for back wages pursuant to an employee request under section 16(c) of the act, the employee does not thereafter have power to cause dismissal of the suit without the consent of the Secretary.
An important issue involving interpretation of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act was before the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia this vear in Wirtz v. Barber-Colman Company, et al., 17 WH Cases 1, in which the district court had ruled that the Secretary's authority under section 1(b) of the act to determine “the prevailing minimum wages" is limited to the determination of only a single minimum wage for all covered employees of a Government contractor, and that it does not permit determination of a different prevailing minimum for any occupational group or groups.
The court of appeals declined to uphold the lower court's adverse ruling on this issue, but left the question open and remanded the case to the district court to give the Secretary an opportunity to make additional findings and to take further evidence, if deemed necessary, to an adequately supported final determination for the machine tool industry, further holding that the determination, when supplied with the requisite findings, might be given retroactive effect.
This litigation concerns the dozen or more workmen's compensation laws administered by the Bureau of Employees' Compensation.
These statutes provide benefits to emplovees or their families in the event of injury or death while in the performance of duty.
Approximately 3½ million workers benefit from the laws; of these, 2½ million are employees of the Federal Government covered by the Federal Employees' Compensation Act or its extensions, while 1 million are employees of private enterprise covered by the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act or its extensions.
With respect to claims of nongovernment employees covered under the Longshoremen's Act and its extensions, the Litigation Division actively participates with the Department of Justice in defending administrative adjudications of the Bureau's Deputy Commissioners in the courts.
A 40 percent increase in such cases has occurred in the last 2 fiscal years with a total of 82 being handled in fiscal 1965.
Significant this year was the decision in which the Supreme Court, on petition for certiorari, upheld the Deputy Commissioner's award for injuries sustained by workmen while engaged in recreational activities at remote defense base areas (Smith, Hinchman & Grylls Associates, Inc., et al. v. William M. O'Keeffe, 380 U.S. 359).
In two similar cases upholding such awards, the Supreme Court denied certiorari (Pan American World Airways, Inc., et al. v. William M. O’Keeffe, 338 F. 2d 319 (C.A. 5, 1964), cert.
World Airways, Inc., et al. v. Stephen O’Hearne, 335 F. 2d 70 (C.A. 4, 1964), cert.
In addition to matters in the Federal courts, the Division defends the Bureau's administrative actions before the Federal Employees' Compensation Appeals Board.
In fiscal 1965, there were 317 such cases.
Another important function of the Division is advising and supervising the prosecution of private damage claims against persons responsible for the injury of Government employees.
This is done both to benefit the injured employee and also to secure maximum reimbursement to the Government from the proceeds of recoveries.
The Federal Employees' Compensation Act provides for such reimbursement for medical expenses incurred on behalf of, and compensation benefits paid to, the injured employee.
Gross recoveries on such claims during fiscal 1965 totaled $4,413,873.85.
After deducting expenses of recovery, a net of $3,161,562.59 remained available for offset against compensation paid or pavable by the United States to its employees or their dependents.
Both of these figures set new records in fiscal 1965.
From the net recoveries, reimbursement of $850,021.04 in cash was made to the Government, and $87,375.99 was allowed as credit for medical bills paid.
Thus, the total immediate benefit to the United States was $937,397.03.
The remainder of the net recovery is available for credit against future liabilities upon the same claims.
The Bureau of Employees' Compensation estimates that the total actual benefit to Government from thirdparty recoveries from reimbursement and credit against future liability amounts to between $1.5 million to $2.0 million annually.
The Division also furnished legal services to the Bureau of Labor Standards in the enforcement of its maritime safety program under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
During the current fiscal year, five cases charging violations were brought before hearing examiners.
Cease-anddesist orders were issued in four cases.
One criminal case was filed in which fines totaling $6,000 were imposed.
The Division of Interpretations and Opinions renders legal services primarily in the form of written and oral opinions, to the various operating bureaus of the Department of Labor, to the field offices, and to the general public.
These opinions express the position of the Department and are used as a basis for enforcement activities.
Opinions are given in the area of labor standards under the Fair Labor Standards Act, Equal Pay Act of 1963, Contract Work Hours Standards Act, Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and Davis-Bacon Act.
They are given also in the area of manpower services and veterans' reemployment rights.
The Federal Employees' Act, Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, unemployment compensation statutes, and Defense Base Act also account for a great many opinions.
The vast majority of interpretative opinions rendered in the labor standards area pertained to the Fair Labor Standards Act, and with more workers being brought under the protection of this minimum wage law the services and workload of this activity of the Division is constantly increasing.
A record number of interpretations and opinions were issued or reviewed by the Division this fiscal year.
These included legal questions considered and disposed of in proposed correspondence, legislative materials, contracts prepared, and other legal documents.
The total in these areas exceeded 52,000 items.
In the veterans' reemployment rights area, 491 legal opinions were prepared and reviewed, and 108 cases were referred to the Department of Justice for litigation.
In the application of the Supreme Court's 1964 clarifications of certain basic principles involved in affording proper restoration to returning servicemen, significant results have been obtained and a substantial number of statutory claims voluntarily settled through negotiation and adjustment.
Documents published in the Federal Register pursuant to provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act and the Federal Register Act numbered 136 for the fiscal year, of which 61 provided new or amended provisions in the Code of Federal Regulations.
One hundred and thirty-four minimum wage orders for industries in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands were prepared and published.
A substantial number of changes and proposed changes in the safety and health codes established pursuant to the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act were also drafted and published.
In addition, regulations were promulgated to put into effect title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 concerning nondiscrimination in federally assisted programs of the Department of Labor.
Manpower service activities were expanded substantially by several new congressional enactments.
Following the enactment of the Farm Labor Contractors Registration Act in September 1964, substantive, procedural, and interpretative regulations implementing its provisions were drafted, adopted, and incorporated into the Code of Federal Regulations.
This act, which became law on January 1, 1965, also required the preparation of procedures and forms as well as the training of investigative personnel and the preparation of an investigator's manual.
The statute, which involves the licensing of farm labor contractors who engage in certain activities relating to interstate agricultural employment, has entailed a substantial volume of opinions and interpretations in its early implementation.
In the enactment of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 which became law on August 20, 1964, Congress provided in title I–B for work-training programs—a responsibility delegated by the Office of Economic Opportunity to the Department of Labor.
The Neighborhood Youth Corps, the organization designated by the Department to carry out this program, required substantial legal assistance, as a new client, in preparing regulations and disposing of the interpretative problems arising under the statute.
The program involves the placement of youth in work-training situations through contracts between the Neighborhood Youth Corps and public or private nonprofit organizations.
Standard form contracts with general provisions consistent with the Federal procurement regulations were prepared and many interpretative problems encountered in the negotiation and execution of the many individual contracts entered into.
The enactment by the Congress of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 required the preparation of departmental regulations under title VI.
These regulations, prohibiting Federal financial assistance in any program which is administered in a discriminatory fashion based on race, color, or national origin, were prepared in collaboration with the Department of Justice and approved by the President.
A substantial number of interpretative problems have arisen in connection with the application of the regulations to the numerous grant and contract programs of the Bureau of Employment Security, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training, and Neighborhood Youth Corps.
The expiration of Public Law 78 on December 30, 1964, which provided the authority for the operation of the Mexican labor program, shifted the emphasis for the admission of foreign workers to certain provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
A number of legal problems arose involving the construction of the Immigration and Nationality Act and departmental regulations promulgated thereunder to provide reasonable recruitment efforts and maximum safeguards for the American work force as conditions to the admission of foreign workers.
The departmental emphasis on an intensive recruitment program to provide American workers to meet the agricultural labor needs in place of former reliance on Mexican nationals also required preparing regulations and sample form contracts and participating in various hearings and litigations.
In the Chase-Glades farm case (not yet reported), suit was brought by farmers in Florida to compel the Secretary of Labor and the Attorney General to extend the stay of certain British West Indies workers.
The Division participated actively in defending the Government's position, and the farmers' request for an injunction was denied.
The extension and amendment of the Manpower Development and Training Act also required preparing regulation amendments, numerous Manpower Administration orders, and a new regulation to accomplish the transfer of training formerly authorized under the Area Redevelopment Act.
The expanded scope of the programs authorized by these amendments, as well as the increased allowances and more liberal terms of eligibility, has presented numerous interpretative problems and required the continued preparation of training contracts, experimental and demonstration contracts, research contracts, and labor mobility demonstration contracts.
The Division assisted in the development of the worker assistance provisions of the proposed Automotive Products Trade Act of 1965, which was introduced to implement the agreement of January 16, 1965, between the Governments of the United States and Canada concerning automotive products.
The Division issued interpretations of the trade adjustment allowance provisions of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 and participated in training sessions with personnel of the Bureau of Employment Security and State agencies regarding such provisions.
The Division reviewed and commented on State proposals and enactments in 48 States in the employment security area.
Advice was given as to whether such proposals and enactments met the requirements of Federal law.
The administration of the Davis-Bacon Act, including the Fringe Benefits Amendment of 1964 and its related prevailing wage statutes, the Copeland Act, the Contract Work Hours Standards Act, and Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 1950, is vested in the Division of Wage Determinations.
The Division's Branch of Wage Determinations determines minimum wages and fringe benefits on Federal and federally assisted construction to be paid laborers and mechanics under contracts subject to the Davis-Bacon Act and related prevailing wage statutes.
The Branch of Coordination and Enforcement administers functions vested in the Secretary by Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 1950, the purpose of which is to achieve coordination of administration and consistency in the enforcement of the statutes covered by its provisions.
During the year, procedures pertaining to the administration of the Davis-Bacon Act and related labor statutes were improved, the Wage Appeals Board concluded its first full year of operations, and the fringe benefits amendment to the Davis-Bacon Act became effective.
The use of the multi-agency area determination, which generally includes wage rates and job classifications for all types of construction, has gained wide acceptance and has been expanded to cover 220 areas.
Pursuant to the fringe benefits amendment which became effective July 2, 1964, fringe benefits were included in determinations for 84 areas on September 30, 1964, followed by the inclusion of benefits by States in an orderly manner.
The inclusion of all States was completed on schedule June 30, 1965.
Five cases have been considered by the Labor Department's Wage Appeals Board.
One appeal was found to be untimely, three cases affirmed the action of the Solicitor, and one case resulted in a reversal of the Solicitor's ruling.
Four of the cases were appeals from wage determinations and the other involved coverage of the act.
A concerted effort was made to contact employer and labor groups and State and local agencies in areas in which difficulties have been experienced in securing wage payment information.
Informational meetings were held to discuss coverage and proper application of the Davis-Bacon Act and related acts, the revised regulations, and the fringe benefits amendment.
Much emphasis has been placed on the need for all groups to provide factual and usable wage payment information to the Division.
On-site wage payment surveys have been employed on an expanded basis in areas where wage payment evidence was contradictory or unsatisfactory.
Procurement agencies have been assisted in updating their labor manuals to reflect changes caused by the revised regulations and fringe benefits.
Consultations have been held with interested contracting agencies to refine and improve the form of the semiannual report on compliance and enforcement.
The Enforcement Branch has assisted agencies in completing and closing cases which are 2 or more years old.
Members of the staff have attended meetings with enforcement officers of various agencies to discuss application of compliance and enforcement procedures.
Two proposals were enacted during the year which contain Davis-Bacon provisions to be administered by the Division: Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 and the Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1965.
The Branch of Wage Determinations issued 25,408 determinations during the fiscal year.
In all, 33,721 items of correspondence were issued in connection with these determinations.
The Branch of Coordination and Enforcement opened 1,058 enforcement cases.
A total of 1,275 cases were processed to completion.
In cases involving serious violations of the various statutes within the scope of Reorganization Plan No. 14, ineligibility sanctions were imposed against 24 contractors responsible for such violations.
As a result of enforcement actions, restitution totaling $447,392.14 was secured for 3,503 laborers and mechanics.
The Division of Labor-Management Laws is responsible for supervising and coordinating the Department's enforcement functions under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 and the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act, and for rendering legal advice and services required for the interpretation and administration of these statutes to the Office of Labor-Management and Welfare-Pension Reports (LMWP) in the Labor-Management Services Administration.
In fiscal 1965, the Division analyzed and considered 316 cases involving the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act for possible civil or criminal litigation.
After analysis, 22 civil actions were instituted in the Federal district courts, and 69 cases were transmitted to the Department of Justice for criminal prosecution.
During the same period, the Division analyzed eight cases involving the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act to determine whether enforcement action was necessary.
Of the 22 civil actions instituted under the LMRDA, 12 involved title IV, relating to the conduct of labor organization elections.
Thirteen election cases, including 11 which were instituted prior to the beginning of fiscal 1965, were favorably concluded with the entry of court orders directing the conduct of new elections under the supervision of the Secretary.
In several of these cases important and precedent-setting court decisions were handed down interpreting the provisions of title IV.
In Wirtz v. Local 30, International Union of Operating Engineers, 242 F. Supp.
631 (1965), the court held that the defendant's requirement that prospective candidates for union office must file a"declaration of candidacy" on or before January 15 to be eligible in an election to be held in June denied the members of Local 30 a reasonable opportunity to nominate candidates in violation of section 401(e) of the LMRDA.
The court also held that such requirement was an unreasonable qualification on the right of members to be candidates.
However, after reviewing the evidence which showed that the complainants who had been wrongfully disqualified had been defeated in each of their previous attempts to seek union office, the court refused to set the challenged election aside, holding that the Government failed to sustain its burden of proof that the violations "may have affected the outcome of the election."
In Wirtz y.
Local Union Nos.9, 9A, and 9B, International Union of Operating Engineers, U.S.D.C., Colo., 58 LRRM 2250, 51 L.C. 19, 579 (1965), the defendant's requirement that members must have paid their quarterly dues on or before their due date on each and every occasion during the year to be eligible as candidates was held to be an unreasonable qualification on the right of candidacy and therefore null and void under section 401(e) of the act.
The court noted that such requirement, rather than being designed to limit candidates to persons who are intensely interested in union activities, worked an undue hardship on the members and operated to exclude 87 percent of the members from being eligible to hold union office.
The court also held that the scope of relief which the Secretary can secure in an action under section 402(b) is limited to the specific matters complained about by the union member.
This case is on appeal to the Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit.
A contrary conclusion was reached in Wirtz v. Local Union 169, International Hod Carriers, Building and Common Laborers' Union, U.S.D.C., Nevada, 59 LRRM 2286, 51 L.C. 19.
715 (1965), wherein the court held that it was not the intention of the act, in view of the public interest involved, to limit the Secretary's authority to investigate and challenge union elections solely to the precise complaints asserted by the protesting union member.
The authority of the Secretary to institute an election challenge beyond the 60-day period set forth in section 402(b) was upheld in two cases in which the court rejected the defendants' assertion that the 60-day period was absolute and held that the Secretary was not required to file his complaint within 60 days if the union delayed his investigation.
The two cases are: Wirtz v. Great Lakes District Local No. 47, International Organization of Masters, Mates and Pilots, U.S.D.C., N.D., Ohio, 240 F. Supp.
859 (1965), and Wirtz v. Local 560, International Brotherhood of Teamsters, U.S.D.C., N.J., Civil Action No. 471–63 (1965).
In Local 57, International Union of Operating Engineers v. Wirtz, 346 F. 2d 552 (C.A. 1, 1965), and Wirtz v. Edmonds, U.S.D.C., Colo., 58 LRRM 2695, 51 L.C. 19.
573 (1965), the courts concluded that the Secretary had authority to investigate union elections and to disclose his findings under section 601 of the LMRDA and that such authority was not dependent on the filing of a member's complaint under section 402(a).
This principle was of particular significance in the investigation of the 1964 election of the International Union of Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers, AFL-CIO, in which the ballots were subpenaed and recounted by LMWP.
As a direct result of the investigation, which exposed a miscount by the union's election officials, and of the publication of the investigation findings, the announced winner resigned and the actual winner was installed as president.
The authority of the Secretary to conduct investigations and to issue subpenas in aid thereof was also at issue in International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. Wirtz, 346 F. 2d 827 (C.A. D.C., 1965).
There the union refused to honor a subpena on the ground that the Secretary had no authority to investigate possible violations of section 501 since he had no enforcement powers concerning that section.
Rejecting this argument, the court of appeals upheld the Secretary's authority and also held that he could not be limited as to those persons to whom he could disclose the results of his investigation.
The Division also participated in six defensive actions brought against the Secretary in the Federal courts.
Two of these cases resulted in judgments for the Government.
In Douglas v. Wirtz, U.S.D.C., M.D. N.C., 232 F. Supp.
A contrary result was reached in Price v. Wirtz, U.S.D.C., N.D. Tex., 58 LRRM 2607 (1965).
The court, in Fowler v. Wirtz, U.S.D.C. S.D. Fla., 236 F. Supp.
22 (1964), held that where such persons act openly and have fully disclosed their clients' names and the purpose of the activities, the act does not apply.
Appeals are pending in each of these cases.
The Division participated in three hearings before the U.S. Board of Parole wherein certificates of exemption from the prohibitory provisions of section 504 of the LMRDA were being sought.
Certificates were denied in two cases.
In the third, the Board, concluding that parole was not included in the term "imprisonment," held that the applicant no longer needed a certificate, since he had been on parole for over 5 years.
The Supreme Court in U.S. v. Brown, 381 U.S. 437 (1965), declared unconstitutional that part of section 504 which imposed criminal sanctions on Communist Party members who held union office.
Two hundred private actions involving the LMRDA were reviewed to determine what effect such suits might have on the responsibilities of the Department.
Supreme Court, Calhoon v. Harvey, 379 U.S. 134 (1964), and American Federation of Musicians v. Wittstein, 379 U.S. 171 (1964).
In Calhoon, the Supreme Court held that section 402 provided the exclusive remedy for challenging the reasonableness of qualifications on the right of candidacy.
In the area of welfare and pension plans, a basic departmental position was endorsed in the case of Wirtz v. Gulf Oil Corporation, U.S.D.C., E.D. Pa., 239 F. Supp.
483, wherein it was held that a group hospitalization and medicalsurgical expense insurance program established by Gulf Oil was an "employee welfare benefit plan" and that the company was the plan "administrator" under the WPPDA, although there existed a contractual relationship between each employee and the plan insurer, with Gulf Oil acting primarily as remitting agent for premiums.
The Division also provided extensive legal assistance during the year to LMWP in the preparation of regulations, reporting forms, and various technical assistance aids and other publications.
Under the LMRDA, this included promulgation of the "Procedure for Removal of Local Labor Organization Officers," issued pursuant to sections 401(i) and 402(b), and preparation and publication in the Federal Register of proposed "Supervision of Election of Officers" regulations, pursuant to section 402(b).
Regulations issued under the WPPDA include a proposal to amend Form D-2 to provide for more comprehensive and meaningful disclosure.
The Division rendered approximately 3,122 written opinions under the LMRDA and approximately 2,790 under the WPPDA.
During the past year, a member of the Division, as a representative of the Secretary, spent 2 months auditing the proceedings of the tellers of the United Steelworkers of America in hearing protests filed by its members complaining about the conduct of its election of officers.
It is believed that such participation played an important role in the amicable resolution of the election issues.
Assignments in the Division of Legislation are as diverse as the many-faceted programs of all the bureaus of the Department.
Nevertheless, the Division's functions are channeled primarily through legislation, labor-management relations, hearings, decision writing, and research.
The preparation of legislative proposals and other legislative materials in the Division complemented the accelerated pace of the Administration's overall legislative program.
The President's labor message to the Congress foreshadowed the direction and urgency of the increased effort—extending minimum wage protection, repeal of section 14(b) of Taft-Hartley, and improvement and modernization of the Federal-State unemployment compensation system.
The Manpower Development and Training Act amendments administered by the Labor Department were drafted by the Division's staff, which also prepared the Secretary's testimony in support of the measure.
The Division of Legislation provided legal assistance to the Secretary's task force of Government and non-Government unemployment compensation experts.
After completing its study, the task force made recommendations to the Secretary which provided a basis for the Employment Security Amendments of 1965—drafted in the Division.
The Secretary's testimony in support of the proposal was also prepared in the Division.
The Division provided legal advice and assistance to the Secretary in connection with his appearances before congressional committees in support of the Administration's proposals to repeal section 14(b) of the Taft-Hartley Act and to extend the coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act, and in support of legislation to permit common situs construction picketing.
Committees in both the House and Senate were assisted by the Division attorneys during congressional consideration of the proposals.
The Division furnished a variety of legal services, including the preparation of the Secretary's order and the Manpower Administration order relating to organization and procedures for the implementation of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
In addition, it provided legal services in the administration of the Department's nondiscrimination-in-apprenticeship program; participated in the preparation of the Government's brief amicus before the U.S. Supreme Court in Amalgamated Meat Cutters v. Jewel Tea Company (33 LW 5425) (involving the application of anti-trust laws to labor organizations); and provided assistance to the President's panel during the recent longshoremen dispute.
In cooperation with the Women's Bureau and other offices, the Division made comprehensive analyses of title VII of the Civil Rights Act with respect to the employment of women.
Division representatives led discussions of this subject in meetings and conferences of intergovernment and other groups exploring the application of title VII to economic opportunities for women.
The Division continued to collaborate with, and furnish special counsel and legal advice to, the Assistant Secretary, the Director of the Women's Bureau, and other officials directing the activities of the Interdepartmental Committee on the Status of Women and to the Citizens' Advisory Council of that Committee.
The preparation of reports to congressional committees and the Bureau of the Budget expressing the Department's views on proposed and pending legislation continued at a high level of activity during the fiscal year.
An important function of the attorneys engaged in labor-management relations and general legal services activity is to provide advisory legal services to the office of the Secretary and other departmental offices and bureaus not otherwise serviced and to prepare letters for the signature of departmental officials.
During the year, the staff prepared 739 analyses, memoranda, and orders, 746 letters for the Secretary's signature, and 2,782 letters for the signature of the Solicitor.
In addition, it performed other legal functions, such as reviewing contracts entered into by the Department.
The hearing examiners held 50 hearings during the year pursuant to various laws administered by the Department of Labor.
Most of these hearings, 37, involved alleged violations of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act; and 24 decisions were rendered in these cases.
The staff writes decisions for (1) the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board in the administration of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, (2) the Secretary of Labor and the Administrator of the Wage and Hour and Public Contracts Divisions in connection with the administration of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and (3) the Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards on appeal from hearing examiners' decisions on violations of safety regulations issued pursuant to the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
It also provides a variety of other legal services with respect to problems arising under these statutes.
A record 280 decisions were written during the year, and the backlog of 97 pending cases was the lowest in recent years.
During the past year, an attorney in the Division served as executive secretary to the Department's Wage Appeals Board and provided other legal services as required.
Also during 1965, the staff was engaged in preparing a legislative history of the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act of 1963; digests of key opinions rendered recently on the Walsh-Healey Act and the Federal Employees' Compensation Act; and reports and miscellaneous legal documents.
The Office of the Solicitor also provides legal services in connection with international responsibilities of the Department, primarily through or under the supervision of the Office of the Special Assistant to the Solicitor for International Affairs.
During fiscal year 1965, services were provided with respect to the International Labor Organization and other international economic problems and activities within the general responsibility of the Department's Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB).
Legal services pertaining to the International Labor Organization included reviewing and supervising preparation of law and practice reports, proposed executive branch position letters on various conventions and recommendations adopted by the ILO, and amendments to the ILO Constitution and other documents.
Legal advice and services pertaining to trade agreement and tariff matters were extended to the Department's Committee on Foreign Economic Policy and the ILAB Division of Foreign Economic Policy, and in connection with the Department's participation in the interagency committee structure under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
The Office also took part in the review of proposed positions and reports on pending legislation dealing with various changes in U.S. tariff schedules and with other treatment of imports.
Considerable time was devoted to the Department's participation in interagency activities relating to the drafting and presentation of proposed legislation to implement the United States-Canadian agreement, signed January 16, 1965, concerning automotive products and to authorize the implementation of future similar international agreements, if any.
The United States-Canadian agreement provides for mutual elimination of duties on new motor vehicles and original automotive equipment to strengthen economic relations and to expand trade in such products between the two countries.
Of special interest to the Department was the development of provisions in the legislation for determination and certification of eligibility of dislocated workers to apply for adjustment assistance in accordance with the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
The Manpower Administration oversees and directs the major Federal responsibilities assigned to the Department of Labor by legislation or directives by the Secretary of Labor for the development of human resources.
Four agencies engaged directly in the employment, improvement, training, or the welfare of the work force in the United States comprise the operating arms of the Manpower Administration.
They are the Bureau of Employment Security, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training, and the Neighborhood Youth Corps.
In fiscal year 1965, a wide variety of programs and activities were undertaken, expanded, or continued by these units in applying the full impact of 14 legislative acts of the Congress, three Executive orders, and the Secretary of Labor's regulations affecting equal employment opportunity.
The Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, as amended.
The Neighborhood Youth Corps provisions of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 (title I–B).
Training provisions of the Area Redevelopment Act of 1961.
The employment security system of job placement and unemployment insurance under the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933 and the Social Security Act of 1935.
The equal opportunity and nondiscrimination provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and enforcement under Executive Order 10925, as amended by Executive Order 11114, in Department of Labor contracts and programs.
Promotion and development of apprenticeship and training under the National Apprenticeship Act of 1937.
Trade adjustment assistance provisions of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
The Public Works Acceleration Act of 1962.
The Employment Act of 1946.
Title IV of the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944.
Title V of the Agricultural Act of 1949, as amended, and the Migrant Labor Agreement of 1951, as amended.
Civil defense and emergency planning functions for manpower utilization.
The skilled worker provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952.
The year was highlighted by broad success in Federal efforts to train and retrain the unemploved and underemployed for occupations in great demand.
It is significant that while the number of new entrants into the labor force increased by nearly 2.8 million, there were more than 400,000 fewer workers unemployed in June of 1965 than June of 1964.
Some of this success may be attributed to the overall training efforts developed under the provisions of the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, as amended.
By the close of the 12-month period, training or retraining had been approved for 239,260 men and women, the great majority of whom were previously unemployed.
The largest number in this group, 160,542, were trained in local vocational school programs developed by the Bureau of Employment Security and the local State employment services in cooperation with local school boards.
Another 42,963 were trained on the job by employers and trade and labor organizations through the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training.
The balance of 35,755 trainees were approved for experimental and demonstration training projects developed by the Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training during the year.
In the middle of the year, a special governmentwide effort to increase jobs and opportunities in all service-type and related occupations was announced by President Johnson to help the Nation take advantage of the rapid, above-average increase in such employment.
In a 5-month period ending June 30, Manpower Development and Training Act institutional projects were developed for 19,000 unemployed persons; on-the-job training projects for about 8,000; experimental projects for 1,000; and Area Redevelopment Act projects for 1,600 trainees.
This effort in the service occupations and industries is continuing with a minimum goal of 10,000 trainees a month.
Perhaps most significant in the manpower program was the confidence voiced in it by the Congress through its extension, expansion, and liberalization, in April, of the Manpower Development and Training Act.
The act, which has already provided training and retraining for hundreds of thousands of unemployed workers and which provides for a broad program of manpower research, was extended to run through June 1969.
The Congress also authorized these changes in the program: Expanded research activities, continuation of the job development program in the service and related occupations, more liberalized determination of trainee allowances, consolidation of Area Redevelopment Act training with MDTA training, permission for trainees to work at part-time jobs, and several other alterations in the original MDTA program.
Through the new amendments to the law, the Department of Labor estimates that by the end of fiscal year 1966, training projects will have been approved for 750,000 unemployed workers under the MDTA program.
With the conclusion of fiscal year 1969, it is expected that this total will stand at 1,400,000.
One of the brightest accomplishments of the year was the immediate success of the newly organized Neighborhood Youth Corps and its work-training program, opening jobs and providing income for young men and women from low-income families.
Even though this program did not reach its potential until the last quarter of the fiscal year, more than 278,400 youngsters between 16 and 21 had been enrolled.
Other major efsorts for youth were successfully undertaken during the year through Youth Opportunity Centers and Apprenticeship Information Centers.
Youth Opportunity Centers, a novel concept to provide employment services to potential workers under 22 years of age, were opened in 40 large labor areas with an additional 68 awaiting funding.
Apprenticeship Information Centers, another successful innovation, helps inform the public on apprenticeship opportunities.
Such centers have been opened in 9 large cities, with 15 more being planned.
More than 3,000 persons, many from minority groups, were referred and accepted as apprentices through these centers.
The fiscal year's accent on youth in manpower policy and planning also included a youth opportunity campaign in May and June.
Private and public employers throughout the country were urged to hire as many young people for summer jobs as they possibly could.
It is estimated that the campaign resulted in the creation of 820,000 new summer jobs for teenagers.
The Manpower Administration's promotional and developmental efforts in the highly skilled apprenticeable occupations continued to pay dividends in fiscal 1965.
For the fourth year in succession, the number of apprentices in programs registered with the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training or with State agencies increased over the previous year.
More than 7,200 new apprentices were in training during the year, bringing the total in training to more than 170,500.
More than 1,200 new apprenticeship programs were developed during the year.
These increases reversed a 15-year downward trend in the numbers of apprentices being trained in the country.
The Federal Committee on Apprenticeship and the Manpower Administration are working closely to work out possible incentive plans to aid private industry in training more highly skilled craftsmen in the building trades and in the metalworking occupations.
Purdue University was given the task of studying all aspects of the apprenticeship system in the United States to help define trends, clarify hiring and training practices, wages, and new skill demands dictated by a changing economy.
Very little of the Manpower Administration's programs could have been accomplished without the Bureau of Employment Security's U.S. Employment Service (USES) and the affiliated State employment services with their network of 1,900 local employment offices.
These local offices were the fulcrum for most of the training programs and the important task of matching workers and jobs.
The great majority of the trainees and workers placed in the MDTA, Neighborhood Youth Corps, Area Redevelopment Act, and Job Corps programs were placed through the U.S. Employment Service.
Many of these trainees and workers were drawn from the 10.9 million new applications for work filed by jobseekers at local public employment offices during the fiscal year.
These offices made more than 6.3 million job placements during the year and another 6 million placements in farm occupations.
Regional offices of the Bureau approved thousands of work visas for aliens, helped place more than 1,400 teachers and principals for elementary and secondary schools overseas, and assisted more than 50,000 retiring military personnel to find work.
With the termination of the supplementary Mexican worker program under Public Law 78 on December 31, 1964, farm employers were faced with the need of replacing alien workers with domestic farmworkers.
This resulted in a drop of 53 percent in the number of foreign workers on American farms, and massive efforts were made by the local employment service offices and the Labor Department to fill the gap.
Through such programs as A-TEAMS (Athletes in Temporary Employment as Agricultural Manpower), Project Growth, Farm Employment Days, and summer farm jobs for college students, the needs of most of the Nation's larger farms were met.
By June 30, fewer than 2,200 foreign workers were employed in agricultural work in the United States.
Just a year before, 65,200 had been working in this country.
The Manpower Administration was deeply involved in the welfare of the unemployed during the year.
As unemployment rates declined nationally from 5.3 percent to 4.7 percent, there were still more than 3 million people who needed assistance to obtain bread and butter.
The Federal-State unemployment insurance system provides for partial replacement of wages lost during periods of involuntary unemployment.
Some 49 million workers in commerce, industry, and Government were covered under this system.
Approximately $2.3 billion in benefits were paid out to some 5 million insured workers for 63.7 million weeks of unemployment.
These benefits were $339 million under those of the previous year.
In most States, the weekly benefit represented about one-half of the weekly wage for those workers who qualified for less than the maximum benefit amount.
In only 13 States, with 10.5 perecnt of the covered workers, did the maximum benefit represent 50 percent or more of average weekly wages.
Total State reserve funds to cover these benefits increased by 13 percent, generally reflecting the continued improvement in the Nation's economy.
Cutting across all of the policies, deliberations, and programs under the aegis of the Manpower Administration in fiscal year 1965 was the concerted effort by Government, industry, and individuals to equalize opportunities for training and employment in the United States.
The operating Bureaus of Employment Security, Apprenticeship and Training, and the Neighborhood Youths Corps applied the provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which required all recipients of Federal financial or other assistance to provide all services without regard to race, color, creed, or national origin.
These provisions applied to all training contracts as well as to all State employment security agencies directly under the administration of the Bureau of Employment Security.
The Secretary of Labor's regulations, issued under title 29, part 30, for nondiscrimination in apprenticeship programs, resulted in the inclusion of nonbias clauses in all programs approved under the registration procedures of both Federal and State agencies.
All 28 States which have apprenticeship agencies have won approval of their operating plans.
All apprentices must be selected and hired on the basis of qualifications alone under objective standards meeting the Secretary's regulations.
While the provisions of title VII of the Civil Rights Act did not become effective until July 2, 1965, the Manpower Administration moved towards its immediate implementation during the closing months of the fiscal year.
These provisions provide that all services of public employment offices be administered without regard to race, color, creed, sex, or national origin.
They also apply to all apprenticeship programs, beginning with apprenticeship programs in organizations with more than 100 employees.
The combined effect of titles VI and VII and the Secretary's regulations on discriminatory employment practices has been noteworthy although not broad in impact.
This lack of immediate scope has been attributed to the large numbers of minority group Americans who are unprepared to grasp new opportunities for employment or training because of poor educational foundations.
The Manpower Administration, in efforts to seek solutions to this basic problem, accelerated its broad and far-reaching program of manpower research during the fiscal year through the Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training.
Research projects included an examination of the psychological makeup of disadvantaged, unemployed workers, special studies of the employment problems of older and younger workers, as well as European experiences with Government training activities.
Many of the results of these studies have already been incorporated in training and pretraining programs, such as the so-called "coupled" programs under MDTA.
In these, trainees undergo several weeks of classroom preparation before they are moved to the on-the-job training site for actual training.
Training avenues have been found for the mentally retarded, the physically handicapped, the prison convict, the juvenile delinquent, and many more.
All programs are moving ahead to help meet the national goal of full employment.
In the following pages, more detailed reports cover the activities of the four Manpower Administration agencies during fiscal year 1965.
The Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, operating with a staff of 597 in 12 regional and 160 field offices throughout the United States, promotes and helps develop and improve programs of apprenticeship and other on-the-job training in all apprenticeable occupations.
It administers and directs the on-the-job training portion of the Manpower Development and Training Act in cooperation with management, labor, and State and community agencies.
It also administers a program of industrial training for foreign nationals in the United States under sponsorship of the Agency for International Development, United Nations, International Labor Organization, and other agencies.
The Bureau sets guidelines for apprenticeship standards; it does no actual training.
Apprentices are employed workers at progressive wage scales who gain practical experience with related instruction.
Apprenticeship programs are the responsibility of industry.
Local management and labor cooperate when workers are organized; management develops and directs the program alone when its labor force does not have organized representation.
Labor-management apprenticeship committees oversee training in approximately 370 apprenticeable occupations.
Most apprenticeships are of 4 years' duration, although some terms are from 2 to 6 years.
When their term is completed, apprentices are awarded certificates as journeymen.
From about 230,000 to 255,000 men and women were in apprentice programs during the year.
About 170,500 of these apprentices were in programs registered under Federal or State agencies.
During the year, the Bureau developed and installed in industry 1,208 new apprenticeship and 1,002 industrial training programs equaling about 8 million training weeks.
A total of 2,977 apprenticeship and training programs were examined for program content and adherence to Federal apprenticeship standards.
About 2,400 significant improvements in the organization, content, and administration of training programs were achieved through Bureau efforts.
Certificates of registration were issued to 1,150 programs; certificates of completion were awarded to 6,599 apprentices; and certificates of meritorious service were awarded 16 individuals.
National apprenticeship standards were revised and approved for sheet metal workers, carpenters, roofers, and plasterers.
New standards were approved for barbers, dental technicians, auto mechanics, and electronic technicians.
One far-reaching action taken by the Bureau in 1965 was approval of a research program by Purdue University to study the extent to which apprenticeship programs for selected journeymen jobs are adjusting to current changes in technology and in the total scope of knowledge required of the crafts.
A variety of Bureau publications were used in promotional and informational activities and more than a half million pieces of literature were distributed.
Bureau exhibits were displayed and representatives attended more than 50 labor and management conventions and conferences.
Since adoption in January 1964 of Federal regulations (CFR 29, Subtitle A, Part 30) pertaining to nondiscriminatory practices in selection and operation of apprenticeship programs, all new apprenticeship registrations of programs by the Bureau have been in conformance with the regulations.
Examples of selection procedures were issued as guidelines to aid in compliance.
Thirty State plans were reviewed and 25 were approved during the year.
The remaining five States which have apprenticeship councils have submitted plans for review to the U.S. Department of Labor Equal Opportunity Review Committee.
There was continued emphasis during the year on promoting equal opportunities for all qualified persons for acceptance into apprenticeship programs.
The Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunity in Apprenticeship and Training contributed materially to this program with the assistance of eight newly appointed industrial training advisers.
Four new apprenticeship information centers were established in Baltimore, Newark, Bridgeport, and Cleveland with the cooperation of the Bureau of Employment Security.
There are now nine such centers.
These centers provide counseling service and aptitude testing for youth and serve as channels for placement with cooperating labor and management organizations.
A total of 1,029 individuals were channeled through the centers for employment as apprentices.
More than 43,000 unemployed and underemployed workers were approved for on-the-job training programs during fiscal year 1965 under the Manpower Development and Training Act.
The Bureau negotiated and developed 1,785 contracts with employers, unions, employer associations, joint apprenticeship committees and city, State, and local governments to provide this training.
Training in more than 400 occupations was represented.
Training costs were set at $22,122,352 to be paid from Federal funds.
Nearly $40,000,000 in wages were scheduled for payment to trainees by employers under the contracts.
Eight State apprenticeship agencies with on-the-job training contracts, developed programs for approximately 7,200 trainees.
Eight national on-the-job training promotional contracts were executed.
The largest single national contract was with the Hospital Research and Educational Trust for the development of programs in 300 hospitals for 4,000 trainees.
Chrysler Motors Corporation provided training for 1,000 automobile mechanics and autobody repairmen in dealer agencies under a national contract.
Project.
These city organizations will develop training opportunities for unemployed persons through subcontracts with employers.
Apprenticeship and training methods in 35 different industrial fields were observed by 56 labor and government officials from 21 foreign countries through itineraries developed and scheduled by the Bureau.
Forty-one participants completed training programs in the United States.
Four labor and technical teams representing Turkey, India, and Brazil completed special tours.
The Agency for International Development sponsored a 3-month tour of the Bureau's Division Chief of Review and Registration for the purpose of assisting in the development of apprenticeship and training programs in four South American nations.
As a necessary tool for the promotion and development of on-the-job training programs under MDTA, the Manpower Administration produced an "Employer's Guide to On-the-Job Training Under the Manpower Development and Training Act."
A pocket-sized pamphlet, the publication explains the eligibility requirements for Federal assistance and the steps necessary to obtain this assistance.
The Bureau's research division published “Tomorrow's Pressmen," a report on a joint labor-management project to increase and improve apprenticeship and journeyman training for pressmen.
The Manpower Administration carries out Federal responsibilities for programs closely allied with State employment security programs encompassing employment and related services for all workers—employed or unemployed, farm or nonfarm—and unemployment insurance services.
These responsibilities are carried out by the Bureau of Employment Security through three services—U.S. Employment Service (which includes a Veterans Employment Service), Office of Farm Labor Service, and Unemployment Insurance Service.
1. Providing an effective employment service to help individuals find employment utilizing their highest capacities and skills.
2. Referring capable employees to employers and providing appropriate employment-related personnel services.
3. Helping workers develop their capacities and skills; working with educational and training authorities for manpower development, training, and utilization; and working with community groups for area economic development and stabilization.
4. Providing an income-maintenance program, soundly financed, to replace a worker's wage loss resulting from involuntary unemployment and, by maintaining purchasing power, contributing to the Nation's economic growth.
5. Insuring that domestic farmworkers are given preference in employment and that use of any supplementary foreign workers does not affect adversely the wages and living and working condition of domestic workers similarly employed.
6. Assisting in development and utilization of civil manpower capability for meeting national emergencies and disaster needs.
7. Assisting other countries to improve methods for achieving employment security objectives.
1. Review of State agency administrative operations, justification of appropriation requests, and audit of expenditures.
2. Analysis of State agency statistical reports on the operation of their programs.
3. Administration of Federal unemployment compensation programs covering separated employees of the Federal Government and ex-servicemen.
Administrative costs for operation of the employment security program are met from congressional appropriations (with basic program funds from taxes paid by employers under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act), with 100 percent grants being apportioned by the Secretary of Labor to cooperating State agencies.
The Federal-State public employment service consists of the Bureau's U.S. Employment Service (USES) and affiliated State employment services with their network of 1,900 local employment offices.
During the year, 10.9 million new applications for work were filed by jobseekers at local public employment offices, and those offices made more than 6.3 million nonagricultural placements and over 6 million farm placements.
Youth Services.
For the first time, Youth Opportunity Centers (YOC’s) were opened to serve as focal points for Government and community efforts to aid youths under 22 years of age to become employable and to find suitable work.
At the end of the year, 40 centers were in operation and 68 others were awaiting funds.
Staffs of YOC's cooperated with officials of other youth-serving programs, including those established under the Economic Opportunity Act, in planning youth services.
Under the President's youth opportunity campaign, employers were urged to offer extra work and training opportunities during the summer to youth between 16 and 21.
From late May, when the program became operational, to the end of June 1965, local employment service offices received 53,653 responses from employers, resulting in 469,103 job openings for youth, and received 1,631,248 responses from youth.
In cooperation with the Selective Service System and the Defense Department, State employment services stationed personnel in 67 of the 73 examining stations of the Armed Forces to provide immediate employment counseling service to youths who failed to meet education or intelligence standards.
During the fiscal year, 74,000 selective service rejectees were given initial interviews; 37,000 received counseling; 12,200 were placed in jobs; and 2,000 were enrolled in training programs.
State employment service offices provided major assistance to the newly formed Neighborhood Youth Corps during the year, participating in about 550 out of 639 projects approved for the new program.
A wide range of services from counseling and testing of applicants to providing space for in-school projects—was provided.
When the Neighborhood Youth Corps offered special disaster relief help in 6 States, the local employment services helped in recruiting 6,150 youth for this work.
Of 36,056 screened applicants requested by the Job Corps of the Office of Economic Opportunity, State employment services referred 32,114 and were working on the outstanding order for 3,942 at the end of the fiscal year.
About 700 local employment service offices in 49 States were involved in screening candidates for referral to the Job Corps.
Labor Mobility Pilot Projects.
The 1963 and 1965 amendments to the Manpower Development and Training Act required that the Secretary of Labor carry out a limited number of pilot projects for demonstrating the effectiveness in reducing unemployment “of programs to increase the mobility of unemployed workers by providing assistance to meet their relocation expenses.
Four million dollars was provided for such projects in fiscal 1965.
Sixteen projects made up the initial program—11 to be conducted by State employment security agencies and 5 by private nonprofit organizations.
Job Vacancy Information.
With the technical collaboration of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Manpower Administration conducted 2 experimental job vacancy surveys in each of 16 areas in fiscal 1965 to measure the extent and nature of unfilled jobs by occupation and industry.
Approximately 80 percent of the more than 20,000 employers contacted returned completed questionnaires.
Cooperative Government Projects.
U.S. Employment Service representatives worked with officials of the Departments of State and Justice concerning procedures for carrving out immigration responsibilities of the Secretary of Labor under the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Specific geographic areas and occupations were identified in which aliens could not enter for employment.
At the end of the fiscal vear, 22 such area certifications were in effect, and importation of all aliens was prohibited for such occupations as sewing machine operators, nurse aides, secretaries, food workers in restaurants and hotels, and deep sea fishermen.
Regional offices of the Manpower Administration received 16,148 job offers to support visa requests from aliens in Mexico; they approved 3,224.
Another 4,217 clearance orders were processed to support requests for permanent importation of aliens from quota countries; 3,597 were approved.
In an advisory role to the Justice Department with respect to temporary importation of alien entertainers, 685 orders were received, representing 2,190 openings.
Eighty-four percent of job orders were approved.
Agreements were signed under the Vocational Education Act of 1963 by State education authorities and State employment services in 53 States and territories.
At the national level, the Manpower Administration arranged with the U.S. Office of Education for State employment services to supply meaningful occupational information to State vocational education agencies.
Local employment service offices reported 6,330,000 nonfarm placements in fiscal year 1965—down 1.9 percent from the previous year.
The January-June 1965 volume of placements, at 3,068, was up 1.6 percent from the corresponding period of 1964.
Professional and managerial placements for the fiscal year, at 255,000, were up 2.4 percent.
Manufacturing placements, at 1,423,500, were up 1.5 percent, with the increase concentrated in durables, particularly automobiles and related hard goods.
Local offices reported 2,114,538 counseling interviews during fiscal 1965 and 1,247,368 applicants counseled—the seventh consecutive year in which the number of individuals counseled exceeded 1 million.
Of those counseled, 793,043 were given the General Aptitude Test Battery for assessment of their potential abilities.
In addition, 628,386 persons were given proficiency tests as an aid to placement, and 1,060,496 were tested with specific aptitude test batteries for selection purposes.
Youth.
Local employment service offices reported 4,102,800 new applications from youth under 22 years of age, up 12.4 percent from fiscal 1964; 748,000 initial counseling interviews, up 8.3 percent; and 1,644,900 nonagricultural placements, up 7.2 percent from the previous year.
117,703 nonagricultural placements.
Thus, 16.3 percent of registered students were placed in employment.
The number of dropouts placed in nonagricultural jobs through formal arrangements between the schools and local offices was reported to be 21,746—39.8 percent of the dropouts registered in formal programs of cooperation with the schools.
Professional and Managerial Personnel.
Placements of professional and managerial personnel totaled 255,100, compared to 249,100 during fiscal year 1964.
A nationwide effort was made to survey, analyze, and emphasize professional placements and to develop, through experimentation at the local office level, improved techniques for the professional placement process.
Twenty-four professional associations, with total membership of about 363,000, were provided with convention placement service at their annual meetings—in fiscal year 1965 a 50 percent increase over the year in the number of groups served.
Agreement was reached for a national registry service to be established at Chicago for the American Library Association and the American Economic Association.
This service will be a prototype for similar service requested by other professional associations.
The labor inventory communications system (LINCS) is designed for use by local employment service offices in matching worker characteristics with job requirements for professional, managerial, scientific, and technical occupations.
The system, consisting of 17 teletype stations in 11 States, completed its first year of operation in fiscal 1965.
The network connects offices in Sacramento, San Francisco, Oakland, San Jose, Van Nuys, Los Angeles, San Diego, Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Detroit, New York, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Seattle, and Washington, D.C. Long-range plans for the system are for it to encompass most occupations and to become a coast-to-coast network serving 56 metropolitan areas in 30 States.
Minority Groups.
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act became effective July 2, 1964.
State employment security agencies as recipients of Federal financial assistance are required by the act to provide all services without regard to race, color, creed, or national origin.
Penalty for violation is withdrawal of grants.
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, which became effective July 2, 1965, provides that all services of public employment offices must be provided without regard to race, color, creed, sex, or national origin.
The interrelationship of the two titles is obvious.
The acts permits complainants under title VII to go to court to enforce its provisions.
The Civil Rights Act put into statutory language the nondiscrimination policy of the Manpower Administration for elimination of all segregated office facilities of State employment security agencies and for their adoption of revised merit system standards providing for employment on a nondiscriminatory basis.
In each regional office the assistant regional administrator was made responsible for the civil rights program and was assigned a full-time professional assistant to work on civil rights matters.
Older Workers.
Over 1,247,400 nonagricultural placements were made of workers age 45 and over, and more than 116,400 such applicants received counseling services.
Of the nearly 238,000 trainees who were enrolled in institutional Manpower Development and Training Act courses since the beginning of such training in September 1962 through June 20, 1965, about 10.6 percent were 45 years of age and over.
Employer practices and attitudes affecting the hiring of older workers were studied in five cities (Baltimore, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Mo., Memphis, Salt Lake City).
Veterans.
Veterans filed 1,197,200 applications for work at local employment offices, representing 18.9 percent of all new job applications filed by men; however, they obtained more than 25.4 percent of all nonfarm job placements for men.
Disabled male veterans, representing 35.5 percent of the handicapped men who sought jobs through the public employment offices, were placed in 46.1 percent of the jobs filled by handicapped men.
During the year, the Veterans Employment Service of the U.S. Employment Service, in cooperation with the Department of Defense, assisted more than 50,000 retiring military personnel to obtain employment.
Handicapped Workers.
In fiscal 1965, the number of handicapped applicants at public employment offices, 451,300, showed no change in percentage of total new applicants.
Handicapped placements as a percentage of total placements remained constant, 278,200 or 4.4 percent.
Rehabilitated clients from vocational rehabilitation agencies accounted for about 6,000 of the placements of the handicapped for the same period.
Placements of disabled veterans decreased from last year by about 4 percent.
Employer Services.
Local employment service offices provided technical assistance to more than 7,000 employers in resolving or minimizing their problems of personnel selection, development, utilization, stabilization of work force, and personnel management.
More than 1 million employers used the placement services.
Training Activities.
About 2,425 Manpower Development and Training Act institutional projects to train 161,400 persons were approved.
Allowance and training costs for these projects totaled nearly $250 million.
Some 140,000 individuals enrolled in training during the fiscal year, and about 70,000 trainees completed training.
More than 7 out of 10 trainees obtained employment, largely in training-related jobs.
By June 30, 1965, ARA training had been made available to eligible residents of 45 States, American Samoa, and Puerto Rico.
During that fiscal year, close to 300 institutional projects to train over 10,000 persons were approved under the ARA program; over 9,500 individuals enrolled in training; about 7,500 completed training.
Over three-fourths of the trainees obtained employment, mostly in training-related occupations.
Job Market Information.
Of the 150 major areas which the Manpower Administration classifies monthly as to adequacy of labor supply, 21 in June 1965 were in categories reflecting substantial unemployment, as compared with 37 at the same period in 1964.
The Manpower Administration also identifies small and very small labor areas of "substantial" and "substantial and persistent" unemployment.
A total of 545 areas, including 21 of the 150 major areas, were so classified in June 1965, as compared with 715 in June 1964.
These areas were eligible for preference in the award of Federal procurement contracts.
From April through December 1964, defense prime contract awards to firms located in substantial unemployment areas totaled $3.7 billion, with $130.8 million in special "set aside" preference awards.
Areas of"substantial and persistent" unemployment were recommended by the Secretary of Labor to the Department of Commerce for designation as redevelopment areas under the ARA and for eligibility under the Accelerated Public Works Act .
Under the mass layoff reporting program involving groups of at least 100 workers, approximately 950 permanent layoffs involving some 311,600 workers, were reported since the system began in 1962.
Over half occurred at plants which discontinued operations.
About 63 percent of the 950 lavoffs were reported in advance of actual layoff.
Local offices provided regular or special services to about one-third of the individuals concerned and worked with other groups in the community in employment development activities.
Smaller Communities Program.
Under the smaller communities program, rural communities were helped to overcome employment problems caused by declining economics.
Through use of mobile teams of interviewers, counselors, and community volunteers in 14 States, a determination was made of the county's economic and current potential manpower resources.
Assistance was given to local leaders in identifying economic development goals and in determining area training needs.
International Manpower Services.
Employment service experience with manpower problems and programs to overcome them were shared with foreign technicians who visited offices of the Bureau and State employment services.
Cooperation was also extended to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in its study of employment services of member countries.
With the termination of the supplementary Mexican worker program under Public Law 78 on December 31, 1964, farm employers were faced with the need of replacing alien workers with domestic farmworkers.
During fiscal year 1965, when total seasonal agricultural employment rose 3 percent and domestic seasonal worker employment rose 9 percent, foreign seasonal worker employment dropped 53 percent.
On June 30, 1965, fewer than 2,200 foreign workers were employed in the United States, as compared with 65,200 on the same date in 1964.
To carry out the intent of Congress in ending the Mexican farmworker program, each request placed with local employment service offices for temporary foreign agricultural workers was reviewed by the State employment service, Manpower Administration, and Office of the Secretary of Labor.
Special Federal-State agency recruitment teams sought new sources of seasonal domestic farm labor, and criteria for recruitment of interstate and foreign agricultural workers were revised to insure that employers seeking to import aliens would offer domestic workers adequate wages and living and working conditions, a work contract, and in some cases transportation.
During 1964, a total of 177,700 Mexican nationals were contracted under Public Law 78 for work in 17 States.
Mexican employment constituted 7 percent of the total 8.5 million man-months of seasonal hired farm labor in that year.
California growers contracted 63 percent of Mexican contract workers and the State led all others in their employment.
British West Indians were used mostly in Florida crops.
Their peak employment rose from 14,900 in 1963 to 15,100 in 1964.
Employment of Canadian workers in U.S. agriculture, principally for Maine's potato crop, dropped slightly from a high of 8,400 in 1963 to 7,800 in 1964.
About 1,200 Japanese, 1,200 Basque sheepherders, and 120 Filipinos were also used in nonseasonal agricultural employment in the United States.
Since agricultural activities do not lend themselves to reporting on a fiscal year basis, the workload figures which follow are for calendar year 1964.
Placement Services.
Local employment service offices reported some 6,451,300 farm placements in calendar year 1964, about 11 percent fewer than the number in the previous year.
In farming areas located within commuting distance of population centers, dayhauls were used by many local offices to transport workers to and from job sites to meet short-term labor needs.
Local offices operated day-haul programs in 554 towns and established day-hauls in 1,425 other towns.
The “established” dayhauls were visited periodically to insure effective operation.
Day-haul programs specifically for youth were operated in 172 towns, and local offices established 927 other day-hauls at points which they visited periodically.
Live-in” employment was another source of summer farm jobs for young people.
Local offices placed 2,040 youths in farm jobs where they lived right on the farm.
National publicity was given to recruitment of youth during the vacation period in A-TEAMS (Athletes in Temporary Employment as Agricultural Manpower).
About 3,000 were placed in farm jobs before the end of the fiscal year.
Several hundred youth obtained farm jobs through "Project Growth," designed to provide work-training experience for disadvantaged youth.
Also placed in summer jobs were some 3,500 college youth.
Farm employment days" provided a means at a central location for personal interviews between available workers in a local area and farmers seeking yearround farmworkers.
Eighty-four local offices participating in this program held 621"farm employment days."
In small communities with a limited need for employment services, volunteer farm placement representatives brought together workers and job openings.
In 1964, there were 2,632 such representatives in 23 States.
Working without pay and in close cooperation with public employment service offices, these representatives referred 48,800 workers to farm and related jobs.
In 14 States, 37,400 farm placements were made for reservation Indians.
Employers in 15 States contracted 14,600 farmworkers from Puerto Rico.
Puerto Ricans were used for the first time on the west coast—91 in Washington for the asparagus harvest and 70 in California for strawberries and mixed vegetables.
Migratory Farmworkers.
The interstate recruitment regulations of the Secretary of Labor, implemented by the Bureau and State employment security agencies, are designed to improve housing, working conditions, and transportation of migrant farmworkers, and to determine wage rates prevailing in areas of employment.
Under the annual worker plan, employment service offices seek to provide consecutive seasonal farm jobs to migratory workers.
In calendar year 1964, 10,300 groups were served, comprised of 133,000 adults.
There were 47,800 children under 16 accompanying adults.
The Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act of 1963 became effective January 1, 1965.
It is designed to benefit migrant workers by eliminating undesirable practices of some interstate farm labor contractors.
The act requires a farm labor contractor (or crew leader) to register with the U.S. Department of Labor if he "recruits, solicits, hires, furnishes, or transports 10 or more migrant workers (excluding members of his immediate family) at any one time in any calendar year for interstate agricultural employment."
Publicity to induce registration of an estimated 12,000 crew leaders produced only 1,777 applications by the end of the fiscal year.
The principal reason for failure to respond was the inability of labor contractors to obtain the liability insurance required by the act.
Of those applying for certification, only 870 met requirements.
In its consulting role to the Attorney General with respect to section 212(a)(14) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, the Department of Labor recommended approval of requests for admittance of 1,031 Mexican farmworkers to the United States for permanent employment.
Farmworkers who were referred by local employment service offices from one area to another for employment, in response to interstate clearance orders, had to be paid wage rates no less than those prevailing in the area of employment.
To determine prevailing wage rates, 1,158 individual wage surveys were conducted by State employment security agencies, and 1,000 determinations and findings of prevailing wages were issued.
Farm labor representatives of the Bureau made 39,983 field inspections during calendar year 1964 to insure compliance with the Migrant Labor Agreement with Mexico, covering operations under Public Law 78, and the workers' contract.
They also investigated complaints and other matters related to the program.
Inspections were made of housing, food service, transportation, and payroll and general recordkeeping.
Over 2,681 deficiencies were revealed and resolved.
The Federal-State unemployment insurance system provides for partial replacement of wages lost during periods of involuntary unemployment; helps to pay basic living expenses when workers are unemployed through no fault of their own; and by sustaining purchasing power, acts as a stabilizing influence on the economy.
During fiscal year 1965, some 49 million workers in commerce, industry, and Government were covered under the Federal-State unemployment insurance program.
This total includes about 5,200,000 Federal civilian employees and members of the Armed Forces.
Another 763,000 railroad workers were insured under a separate system administered by the Railroad Retirement Board.
Although the average insured unemployment rate dropped from 4 percent in fiscal year 1964 to 3.3 percent in fiscal year 1965, approximately $2.3 billion in benefits was paid out to some 5 million insured workers for 63.7 million weeks of unemployment.
Those benefits were $339 million (13 percent) under those of the previous year.
Benefits are financed through payroll taxes under each State's unemployment insurance law.
In fiscal year 1965, slightly over 2.4 million employers paid about $3 billion in unemployment insurance taxes.
Beneficiaries under State unemployment insurance programs received an average weekly payment of $36.56.
Average duration was 12.6 weeks for all beneficiaries and 21.6 weeks for those who exhausted their entitlement.
Benefits for unemployed Federal workers and ex-servicemen are financed through direct Federal appropriations but are paid to eligible claimants by State employment security agencies as agents of the U.S. Secretary of Labor.
Approximately 254,500 unemployed Federal workers and ex-servicemen filed claims in fiscal year 1965 and received payments totaling $132 million.
For Federal workers and ex-servicemen, the average weekly payment was $36.72; the average duration, 13.5 weeks.
Financial developments during fiscal year 1965 generally reflected continued improvement in the Nation's economy.
Total State unemployment insurance reserve funds increased for the fourth successive fiscal year, by 13 percent, to $7.6 billion.
This amount was 5.6 percent of taxable wages, or 3.2 percent of total wages, paid in covered employment for calendar year 1964.
This improvement resulted from the substantial decrease in benefit payments, from $2.6 billion in fiscal year 1964 to $2.3 billion in fiscal 1965, and the continued high level of UI tax collections, totaling $3 billion.
Interest earned on invested funds, the other main source of revenue, amounted to $244 million—$36 million more than the amount for the preceding fiscal year.
The Federal unemployment account is available for loans to States with low reserve funds.
It is built up and maintained from any excess of Federal payroll tax receipts over the cost of State agency administration of the employment service and unemployment insurance programs.
The balance in the account is limited to $550 million or 0.4 percent of the aggregate of the calendar year taxable wages of all States, whichever is greater.
The cash balance in the Federal unemployment account was $153.8 million on June 30, 1965—nearly $69 million higher than the balance the year before.
Unemployment insurance legislative activity resulted in some significant enactments involving benefit and taxing provisions.
Higher qualifying requirements were enacted in 5 States, and coverage provisions were changed in 13 States, with 2 of these changes being quite significant—New York expanded its coverage of domestic workers and South Dakota permitted political subdivisions to elect coverage.
Weekly Benefit Amount.
Fifteen States increased the maximum weekly benefit by amounts ranging from $2 to $19.
Three States (Iowa, Maine, Rhode Island) provided for automatic adjustment of the maximum weekly benefit in accordance with changes in average wages.
Increases in the maximum benefit became effective in 11 other States that had previously adopted similar provisions for automatic adjustment of the maximum—Arkansas, Colorado, Idaho, District of Columbia, Kansas, North Dakota, South Carolina, Utah, Vermont, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
At the end of fiscal year 1965, maximum basic weekly benefit amounts ranged from $20 in Puerto Rico to $56 in Wisconsin.
Thirty-four States, with 69.9 percent of covered workers, had a maximum benefit of $40 or more; 8 States, with 30.1 percent of covered workers, had a maximum of $50 or more; 8, with 11.1 percent of covered workers, still had a maximum benefit of less than $35.
In States which provide dependents' allowances, the basic weekly benefit is defined by law to be the amount for a claimant with no dependents.)
In most States, the weekly benefit represented about one-half of the weekly wage for those workers who qualified for less than the maximum benefit amount.
As shown in the following table, the small increases in the maximum weekly benefits effected during fiscal 1965 did not keep pace with increases in wages.
In only 13 States, with 10.5 percent of the covered workers, did the maximum benefit represent 50 percent or more of average weekly wages.
As shown in the following table, eight States, with 18.2 percent of covered workers, provided uniform duration.
In other States which varied the duration of benefits with a worker's base-period wages, the maximum duration ranged from 22 to 39 weeks.
Forty-nine States, with 98 percent of covered workers, provided a maximum potential duration of 26 weeks or more.
Financing Legislation.
Four States increased their taxable wage base: California from $3,800 to $4,100, Minnesota from $3,000 to $4,800, and Wisconsin from $3,000 to $3,600, all effective January 1, 1966; Nevada changed from $3,600 to $3,800, effective April 1, 1965.
Oregon repealed a provision for increasing the wage base by $200 when the fund reserve ratio is under 6 percent.
At the end of the fiscal year, 18 States had provisions for a taxable wage base above the $3,000 specified in the Federal Unemployment Tax Act.
One State (Nevada) increased its standard tax rate; seven States increased their maximum tax rates—California, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, Minnesota, North Carolina, and Rhode Island (with three—Indiana, Iowa, and Maine—going above 2.7 percent for the first time).
These actions brought to 37 the number of States providing a maximum tax rate above 2.7 percent.
Other significant legislative enactments involved fund solvency measures in seven States—California, Indiana, Minnesota, Nevada, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin.
Substantial revisions in Federal legislation on unemployment insurance were proposed by President Lyndon Johnson near the end of the fiscal year and were incorporated in Employment Security Amendments of 1965—House bill H.R. 8282 and Senate bill S. 1991.
The proposed amendments were designed to effect the first major changes in the structure of the system since 1935 and to correct major problems of obsolescence and basic weaknesses in the system.
1. A permanent Federal program of extended benefits for the long-term unemployed with a firm and substantial attachment to the labor force, to be financed by a new Federal payroll tax on covered employers and by an equal amount from general revenue.
2. Federal requirements as to minimum benefits to be provided under State laws.
3. A program of matching grants for States with excessive benefit costs.
4. Federal standards on disqualification periods and certain eligibility conditions.
5. Extension of coverage to small firms, nonprofit organizations, and some agricultural employers.
6. Increase in the taxable wage base from $3,000 to $5,600 after 1966 and $6,600 after 1970.
7. Repeal of Federal standards governing State pooled fund experience-rating plans.
8. A sanction to enforce equal treatment of maritime workers under State laws.
The proposed legislation would also create a Special Advisory Commission to review operations of the program, particularly results of the new amendments, and to report to the Secretary of Labor at a specified future date.
During fiscal year 1965, approximately $81.5 million was paid in allowances and approximately 108,500 trainees were determined eligible tor training allowances under provisions of the Manpower Development and Training Act (MDTA).
In addition, about $3 million in retraining subsistence allowances was paid to some 11,600 individuals who were referred to training under the Area Redevelopment Act.
1. Extension of the program to July 30, 1969.
2. Extension of period for which allowances may be paid from 52 to 104 weeks.
3. Computation of the weekly training allowance amount on a four-quarter average of unemployment compensation payments in the State, instead of a onequarter average, thereby insuring against frequent fluctuations in the amount trainees receive.
4. Payment of training allowances to single trainees without dependents; also to members of a household whose head is employed if allowance is necessary to permit family member to begin or to continue training.
5. Increase of $5 a week in allowance to a trainee for each dependent over two and up to a maximum of six dependents.
6. Increase from one to two in number of members in a household who may receive training allowances.
7. Continuation of youth allowances beyond the 22d birthday for one whose training is substantially completed when he becomes 22.
8. Provision of transportation allowances for daily commuting to and from training facility.
9. Increased transportation and subsistance allowances to trainees living in certain remote areas.
10. Permission for 20 hours of outside work per week by on-the-job trainees without reduction in training allowance.
11. Incorporation of training provisions of Area Redevelopment Act under MDTA.
12. Repeal of requirement for State matching of funds for payment of training allowances.
13. Postponement of effective date of State matching for institutional training costs to July 1, 1966.
As of the end of fiscal 1965, limited funds had been authorized for relocating unemployed persons to other areas where full-time employment is assured.
2. Provided for grants equal to 100 percent of relocation expenses, with the requirement that interest be charged on all loans.
3. Stipulated that loans be restricted to cases where there is reasonable assurance of repayment and where credit is not otherwise available on reasonable terms from private sources or through other Federal, State, or local programs.
4. Provided that repayment of loans be required within 10 years.
5. Provided that the amount of a loan together with other funds available be adequate for achievement of its purpose.
Agreements between the Secretary of Labor and State employment security agency administrators, providing for payment of readjustment allowances under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, were submitted to State agencies.
At the end of the fiscal year, 50 agreements had been signed.
Out of 19 petitions filed by representatives of industries and worker groups for findings of adverse effect resulting from imports authorized under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, the U.S. Tariff Commission denied all but 1 and that petition was withdrawn.
At the end of the fiscal year, 21 States were planning, installing, or operating a continuous wage and benefit history program, 15 more than at the end of fiscal 1964.
The Manpower Administration urged full participation and provided a guide for State agency use in developing and maintaining such a program.
Basic wage and benefit history data are generally available from State agency files and can be accumulated throughout the work life of covered workers and claimants.
Most other unemployment insurance research in fiscal year 1965 involved qualifying requirements, especially benefit entitlement studies.
One benefit entitlement study was completed and 11 others were in progress.
Four studies were completed on extension of unemployment insurance coverage; three were in process; two were planned.
These studies concerned coverage of State and local government and nonprofit organizations, and the feasibility of extending coverage to agricultural workers.
Other research conducted by State employment security agencies probed duration and adequacy of benefits; characteristics of claimants; nonmonetary determinations, including disqualified claimants; and specific claimant groups.
Included in the last group were studies of claimants filing in successive benefit years.
Five studies of temporary disability insurance were completed in the fiscal year; nine were in process; one was being planned.
Work continued on special studies of beneficiaries under the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation (TEUC) Act of 1961.
In cooperation with the Pennsylvania and Oklahoma agencies, two reports were published— "The Long-Term Unemployed: Labor Force Status After Exhaustion of Benefits" and "The Long-Term Unemployed: Educational Attainment."
Three other reports under the general title “The Long-Term Unemployed" were nearing completion—"Comparison With Regular Unemployment Compensation Claimants,""Financial Resources and Adjustments,"and "Interstate Claimants."
Upon completion of these studies, basic data were made available to interested research institutions.
Assistance to State agencies in technical and training areas was focused on recruitment and training of qualified counselor candidates, particularly for services to youth.
Most States had established counselor positions with appropriate qualification requirements.
In the 56 major metropolitan areas (population over 500,000), the Manpower Administration undertook a continuing program of operations review and consultation with State and area staff.
Field studies were made in these major areas to improve coordination of employment service and unemployment insurance operations.
Project CAUSE (Counselor-Advisor University Summer Education) was conducted during the summer of 1964 by the Manpower Administration in cooperation with State employment security agencies and 27 universities and colleges.
The project was designed to train counselor aides and youth advisers to help meet the need of State employment services for qualified staff to work with disadvantaged vouth.
In all, 21,993 persons completed the examination and 1,901 were accepted: 1,832 completed the university training; and 1,724 were certified as either counselor aides or youth advisers.
More than 1,100 graduates were placed in jobs with State employment security agencies.
Most of the others found jobs in other youth programs.
Because of the continuing shortage of fully qualified counselors, plans were made for a second such training project during the summer of 1965.
The revised third edition of the "Dictionary of Occupational Titles" was completed and sent to the printer.
It defines and classifies 23,000 jobs and the worker traits required for their performance.
Programed training materials were prepared to facilitate introduction of the Dictionary and its revised occupational classification system.
The following job information documents were completed or were nearly completed: "Health Careers Guidebook," which describes more than 200 different careers and is designed for secondary school students and their counselors, and a new edition of the "Career Guide for Demand Occupations," which provides a comprehensive analysis of seven occupations currently in short supply.
The Manpower Administration published an Employment Service Review each month with a separate Statistical Supplement; an Unemployment Insurance Review and a companion publication, Unemployment Insurance Statistics; Area Trends in Employment; and an Employment and Wage Supplement to Farm Labor Developments.
The latter document is published only during the active farm season.
The Neighborhood Youth Corps, an integral arm of the Manpower Administration, directs one of the major programs for youth established by the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964.
The work-training program (under title I-B of the act) opens up jobs and provides income for young men and women, aged 16 through 21, from lowincome families.
Work performed by enrollees expands needed community services.
Enrollees are usually paid $1.25 for each hour of work.
They do not displace regularly employed persons.
For the Neighborhood Youth Corps, fiscal year 1965 was primarily a year of planning, organization, and development.
The first NYC project, in Newark, N.J., was approved in December 1964 and began operation in January 1965.
The number of approved projects increased each month thereafter, but the program operation did not reach full scale until the last quarter of the fiscal year.
See appendix table 10.)
By the end of fiscal year 1965, 639 agreements were signed by the Federal Government and local sponsors.
These agreements provided jobs for 278,426 young men and women.
The projects, which were planned and operated by local citizens with technical assistance offered by NYC staff, operated in all 50 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico at a total cost of $146,076,115.
See appendix table 11.)
The Federal Government, which was authorized to pay up to 90 percent of the cost of each project, contributed $127,675,880.
The local share of $18,334,006 included contributions in cash as well as in plant, training facilities, services, and equipment.
In addition, there were three developmental projects, with no enrollees, that cost the Federal Government $66,229.
NYC provides opportunities for enrollees to perform useful services in the areas of social and economic life where urgent public needs are neglected or unmet.
NYC projects stem from services that a State, county, or municipal government or a private, nonprofit organization may offer in the fields of health, education, welfare, recreation, and conservation.
In fiscal 1965, enrollees worked as aides in schools, hospitals, museums, playgrounds, parks, forests, public housing projects, settlement houses, old age homes, and residences for homeless children.
They aided disaster-ravaged areas, such as those hit by spring floods and tornadoes, and assisted with special programs, such as Head Start, a program directly administered by the Office of Economic Opportunity, to enable communities to organize and operate preschool programs which create an environment to develop disadvantaged children to their full potential.
They performed community services that would not otherwise have been done, and they contributed to the conservation of natural resources and the development of recreation areas.
NYC projects place special emphasis on encouraging young people to stay in school or to resume their schooling.
During the 1965 fiscal year, the projects were geared to include 191,945 young men and women who at the same time were also attending school.
The in-school projects averaged 14 weeks' duration.
Enrollees attending school were limited to 15 hours of work a week in the Neighborhood Youth Corps, to make sure that worktime did not interfere with schoolwork.
Youths for whom the traditional school setting is not a realistic choice may also enroll in the Neighborhood Youth Corps.
For such out-of-school and unemployed young men and women, NYC projects emphasize development of the attitudes, habits, and behavior required for regular employment.
Enrollment in the NYC is expected to be a first step for these youngsters—a successful beginning, a bridge that will enable them to return to the classroom, undertake skill training, or hold a job in the regular world of work.
During the 1965 fiscal vear, NYC out-of-school projects provided 86,481 jobs.
These projects averaged 20 weeks' duration and permitted out-of-school youths to work up to 32 hours a week.
Out-of-school projects often ran 40 hours a week, with the extra hours devoted to remedial education and counseling.
Projects ranged in size from one that included 3 youths to another that had the capacity for 14,500 youths.
The average in-school project was authorized to enroll 363 youths.
Approximately 250 youths were enrolled in the typical out-of-school project.
Personnel in the 7 regional and 14 district offices around the Nation were available to assist potential sponsors in the preparation of proposals and to offer professional guidance once a project was underway.
As required by the Economic Opportunity Act, sponsors of Neighborhood Youth Corps projects coordinated their efforts with existing community action programs.
Before projects were drawn up, potential sponsors surveyed the need in their communities for NYC and located opportunities to employ NYC enrollees.
To be acceptable, proposals had to demonstrate the educational and professional competence of the staff to direct NYC projects and the capacity of the sponsoring organization to fulfill its commitments.
Sponsors were required to assume primary responsibility for recruitment and selection of NYC enrollees.
They were encouraged to use the services of State employment services and the newly created youth opportunity centers of the State employment services to recruit and refer out-of-school enrollees.
Schools that sponsored projects for in-school youths usually did their own recruitment and selection.
Those responsible for selection were instructed to seek out those who most needed help: The economically disadvantaged who, in addition, were dropouts or potential dropouts; adjudicated delinquents; youths with disciplinary problems, or under-achievers.
Review and evaluation of current projects was carried out by members of the national staff who periodically visited projects to observe program practices.
One project was terminated because review showed regulations for determining eligible enrollees had been ignored.
A composite picture of the NYC enrollee during the fiscal year 1965 is presented below.
Data for this picture was drawn from a heavily representative study of 25 percent of those enrolled in NYC.)
Was 18 years of age.
Lived in a household of five persons, but could possibly be among the one-third of all enrollees whose household consisted of at least seven persons.
Had completed the 10th grade before dropping out of school.
Had been out of school from 1 to 2 years, but if in the 20 to 21 age bracket, had been out for over 2 years, most likely.
Was 17 years of age.
Lived in a household of five persons, but could possibly be among the one-third of all enrollees whose household consisted of at least seven persons.
Had completed the 10th grade in school.
Had had no previous employment experience.
Was looking for part-time employment.
Negroes represented the largest proportion of out-of-school youth of any age, although more than half of the enrollees were white.
Approximately 60 percent of the enrollees were male.
The national staff assisted sponsors with program development so that enrollees might receive not only work-training, which is the heart of the legislation behind the Neighborhood Youth Corps, but the related services that are so necessary for maximum benefits.
Preselection testing was available through the resources of the U.S. Employment Service.
In-project counseling and guidance were important components of projects.
The success of a Neighborhood Youth Corps is measured, of course, by what happens to an enrollee after a project ends.
A commitment by the sponsor of each project for job development, placement, and followup is prerequisite to the signing of and NYC agreement between a local sponsor and the U.S. Department of Labor.
From the beginning, project directors have been urged to work closely with local leaders in education, business, labor, and industry to develop opportunities for young people who have "graduated" from the Neighborhood Youth Corps.
Some results are already evident: Businessmen have appeared at assemblies of NYC enrollees to give tips on how to get and hold a job.
Selected industries have guaranteed jobs for a specific number of young people who have successfully completed enrollment in a NYC project.
Many dropouts have returned to school.
Other enrollees have been assisted in making a smooth transition from the Neighborhood Youth Corps to more advanced skill training programs such as those operated under the Manpower Development and Training Act.
Some have entered the armed services.
For others, regular jobs have opened up that were, in effect, created by the Neighborhood Youth Corps.
This happened in areas where needed but previously nonexistent services were so well performed by NYC enrollees that the services were continued beyond the length of the project.
Neighborhood Youth Corps, have acquired the self-respect and basic workexperience necessary for regular employment.
Nondiscrimination has been a main focus of the Neighborhood Youth Corps since its inception.
NYC has always required a special assurance from sponsors that they will adhere to the letter and spirit of equal employment opportunity without regard to race, color, creed, or national origin.
Sponsors have been required to follow nondiscriminatory practices in recruiting and selecting enrollees, in making work assignments and offering supportive services such as counseling and remedial education, and in employing staff members.
From the beginning of the program, NYC evaluators have looked for evidence of compliance and have reported violations to the Director.
Generally, compliance has been good.
Where there has been evidence of discrimination, every effort has been made to correct the situation.
NYC expects that the title VII provisions of the Civil Rights Act will give it the additional tools necessary to fully realize its basic objectives in this field.
The Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training is responsible for the planning, research, and evaluation of Labor Department activities under the comprehensive manpower program.
1. Develops and recommends plans for a comprehensive manpower program to guide departmental activity and to provide leadership to other governmental agencies, employers, labor unions, and other organizations dealing with manpower problems.
2. Provides leadership, coordination, and direction to the manpower and automation program of the Department; and, using its own staff and through grants and contracts with other governmental and nongovernmental agencies, conducts a research program to obtain knowledge and insights needed for effective action on manpower problems.
3. Obtains understanding and support of the manpower program by providing technical manpower information to the public and special groups; by fostering the activities of the Committee on Specialized Personnel, the National Manpower Advisory Committee, and local advisory committees; and by providing a clearinghouse of automation and manpower materials and information.
4. Evaluates the manpower program, determining on a regular and systematic basis the extent to which the program is bridging the gap between performance and objective; and recommends appropriate action.
5. Provides technical assistance to foreign countries in the area of manpower planning and development.
OMAT's major operating segments are the Office of Manpower and Automation Research, responsible for the planning, development, and conduct of the comprehensive manpower research program; and the Office of Manpower Development, responsible for program planning and policy development in the field of occupational training and for interpretive, appraisal, and evaluative functions.
During 1965, as part of the Department of Labor's efforts to achieve greater efficiency and economy in its operations, OMAT's field offices in 14 major metropolitan areas were closed and program activities were centralized in the national office.
All field offices were closed by June 30, 1965.
The most significant development of the fiscal year was the passage by the Congress of the Manpower Act of 1965, which broadened, strengthened, and extended the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, as amended.
Extension of the termination date for training under title II from June 30, 1966, to June 30, 1969.
Postponement of State contributions to training costs until fiscal year 1967 and lowering of the State contribution from one-third to one-tenth, which may be in kind as well as cash.
Transfer of training formerly conducted under the Area Redevelopment Act to the MDTA with total Federal financing.
Expansion of provisions relating to allowances by: Increasing the maximum period for which they may be paid from 1 to 2 years; providing an increment for dependents; allowing on-the-job trainees to work part-time in jobs unrelated to their training for up to 20 hours a week without reduction in their allowance; paying daily transportation expenses for all trainees; extending eligibility for training allowances to single adults not living as a member of a family and for other than family heads when the family head is unemployed.
Amendments to title I expand and coordinate the research program by permitting a more comprehensive program of basic research and by bringing together all experimental, developmental, demonstration, and pilot projects under title I.
Increase of basic research funding and authorization for the Secretary to make grants as well as enter into contracts for research and experimental programs.
Transfer of the program of experimental and demonstration projects to title I to assure the expansion of such projects without regard to funding limitations and to permit such projects to be undertaken through contracts or grants.
Authorization of Federal assistance for active job development programs.
Extension and transfer to title I of the labor mobility demonstration projects originally authorized under the 1963 amendments.
Authorization for a pilot program to experiment with placement of persons having difficulty in securing employment for reasons other than ability to perform.
A major function of the research staff is preparation of the Secretary's report to the President for inclusion in the annual Manpower Report of the President.
The 1965 Manpower Report analyzed recent employment and unemployment trends, with particular attention to the persistently high unemployment rates of special groups and to new programs and policies to reduce such unemployment; projected the magnitude and composition of the labor force and examined the impact of government programs; reviewed trends in manpower development; assessed trends in geographic mobility of the American work force; described the role of the Federal-State employment service system in matching workers and jobs; and presented a comprehensive statistical appendix of both current and historical data bearing on manpower.
The contract research program produced some notable results during the year as projects initiated in the first 2 years of the program reached completion.
The program is designed to stimulate and draw on academic and other research resources to develop new information on manpower problems.
1. A comparative analysis of government retraining activities in Western Europe, indicating directions American policymakers should consider in the light of European experience.
The study was conducted under contract with the University of California's Dr. Margaret S. Gordon.
2. The first survey of the extent and sources of formal occupational training received by the American work force.
The published findings help put in perspective the major gaps in overall national training efforts.
The data were gathered under contract with the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
3. An analysis of the growth and significance of the public and private notfor-profit sectors of the economy in relation to national use of manpower resources.
This study, "The Pluralistic Economy," is one of a series contracted for with Columbia University, under the direction of Dr. Eli Ginzberg, to examine “growth constellations" in the economy in terms of their manpower implications.
4. A survey of the initial employment experience of military retirees.
The identification and analysis of the distinctive employment difficulties confronting this growing group were made by the Bureau of Social Science Research, Inc.
These and other studies developed by the contract research program are outlined in the Secretary's annual report on research and training under the MDTA and in an annual booklet summarizing OMAT-sponsored projects.
In addition, each completed report is distributed to major libraries and document reference centers, and reports are disseminated widely to potential-user organizations and individuals with special interest in that subject.
In fiscal 1965, about 200 formal research project proposals were received; most were not directly solicited, but some were expressly invited or encouraged.
Contracts were actually negotiated for 41.
1. A major "longitudinal" labor force survey of national samples of older persons and younger men.
Under contract with the Ohio State University Research Foundation and the Bureau of the Census, this study will trace the same persons annually over a period of 5 years in an effort to gage the influence of economic and social developments and of changes in family, age, health, and other personal circumstances on continued participation in the labor force and on changes in types of employment.
2. The first sizable examination of apprenticeship programs and their need for adjustment in the light of changing work conditions.
Developed in cooperation with the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, this study to be conducted by Purdue University will focus on a number of major apprenticeable craft occupations.
3. The development of projections of manpower required in various occupations by 1970 and 1975 to attain national goals in education, health, housing, space, and other areas.
This work, undertaken by the National Planning Association, is designed to provide perspective on problems of allocation of manpower resources as between competing yet interdependent national objectives.
Some of the significant “internal" research activity in fiscal 1965 included: 1. Studies focusing on "special training needs" of specific manpower groups who are underutilized in terms of their potential.
A bulletin drawing together information on the mentally retarded, for example, received wide attention.
Earlier studies focused on young workers and on unemployed heads of families; other studies in process during the year are on women workers, prison inmates, and the physically handicapped.
2. Detailed examination of the psychological makeup of disadvantaged unemployed workers to aid in shaping training programs.
The motives and attitudes of a sample of such trainees and trainee dropouts were explored; a report on findings is to be published.
3. Special surveys to aid in manpower policy planning of other Federal agencies.
One study surveyed employment service offices, industry training directors, and college placement officials to determine the effects of the selective service draft on employment experience of young men, as part of an overall Defense Department review of military service policies.
Another surveyed requirements of government agencies for aviation personnel as part of a study of future civil aviation manpower requirements by the Federal Aviation Agency.
4. Study of experience in other countries relevant to domestic policy.
The practices of U.S. companies training foreign workers for their subsidiaries in developing countries were described in a special bulletin.
The departmentwide Coordinating Committee on Manpower Research, headed by OMAT, prepared an inventory of all manpower research conducted or sponsored by the Department to aid in coordinating and planning efforts, and developed a plan which identifies new directions to be emphasized in forthcoming research efforts.
Activities in fiscal year 1965 were concerned primarily with refining the operating tools—procedures, regulations, and instructions.
Continuing analysis and evaluation of programs revealed the need for improvement in the administration and coverage of the basic legislation—which led to the enactment in April 1965 of amendments to the MDTA (the Manpower Act of 1965).
OMAT personnel coordinated recommendations for these amendments and prepared background materials in support of them.
OMAT continued to develop and coordinate policy needed to implement such training provisions of the new amendments as liberalization of allowances.
Guidelines were also issued on expansion of the use of the individual trainee referral plan, training for subprofessional occupations and refresher training for unemployed professional workers, training individuals employed less than fulltime or below their skill potential, and training for persons residing in redevelopment areas.
Revised standards dealing with overall administration of the MDTA program were issued on such matters as obligation and deobligation of funds to assure the most effective use of available monies and simplifying requirements for undertaking small on-the-job projects.
OMAT provides leadership to other offices and bureaus of the Department in developing plans for specific manpower program applications.
One major undertaking involved laying out a complete plan—encompassing organizational structure, policy recommendations, contracting, and other administrative procedures—which enabled the Neighborhood Youth Corps, established to implement title IB of the Economic Opportunity Act, to become operational immediately upon signing of the act.
Other important planning functions performed during the fiscal year included: Coordination of activities of the Department of Defense and the Department of Labor in developing plans for retraining workers expected to be affected by cutbacks in military installations; initiation of the development of a national-State manpower development planning system; setting up plans for implementing the bonding assistance program provided in the Manpower Act of 1965; and coordinating the preparation of recommendations for establishing a system of program experimentation.
While evaluations during 1965 continued to concentrate on the MDTA program, toward the end of the fiscal year planning was begun on studies covering other manpower programs.
Studies included an evaluation of the effectiveness of MDTA from the standpoint of trainees and their employers, a study of persons who did not complete their MDTA courses, evaluations of OJT programs, a preliminary evaluation of multi-occupational projects involving institutional training under MDTA, an evaluation of the results of an experimental and demonstration project for disadvantaged adults conducted by Virginia State College, and an evaluation of household worker training under MDTA.
Among the most significant findings were that: Even persons who left MDTA training courses before completion usually benefited greatly from the training, Negroes had a much poorer post-training employment record than whites, and about six out of seven employers considered their experiences with MDTA to be satisfactory.
Plans were developed during the year for a comprehensive evaluation system in the Manpower Administration under the leadership of evaluation staff of OMAT with specific responsibilities assigned to the constituent agencies of the Manpower Administration.
In keeping with its continuing responsibility for improving program statistical data, OMAT exercised leadership in achievement of a more comprehensive and statistically valid reporting system.
Early in the year, a regular report on the post-training employment experience of individual MDTA graduates was launched.
A survey of the first 36,000 returns from graduates of institutional programs showed that: About three-fourths had found jobs; men had a better job-finding rate than women; white persons a better rate than nonwhite persons; and high school graduates a better rate than nongraduates.
The degree of jobfinding success was affected not only by the personal characteristics of graduates but by the skills attained through training.
Licensed practical nurses had one of the highest placement rates (90 percent) and clerk-typists one of the lowest (70 percent).
The MDTA experimental and demonstration program concerns itself with preparing marginally employable workers for entry or re-entry into the labor force.
It has provided a vehicle for demonstrating the usefulness of several basic techniques now common to many local and regional antipoverty efforts.
Among these are the use of indigenous subprofessionals to reach the disadvantaged on their home ground; work-sample and other nonverbal tests to measure training and employment potential; sheltered workshops, work crews, work tryout stations, and repetitive placement as avenues to steady employment; and the integration of public and private resources for maximum impact in reaching and developing the productive potential of the hardcore unemployed.
As these efforts began to pay off in terms of large-scale mobilization of community resources for a serious assault on the problems of the poor, the E & D program began focusing on the problems of groups who will be touched only lightly by even these expanded programs—such groups as dope addicts, alcoholics, the inmates of mental institutions, legal offenders, and the mentally retarded and the physically disabled.
The Manpower Act of 1965 in effect transferred the training provisions of the Area Redevelopment Act, with certain modifications, to the Manpower Development and Training Act.
The sections in the ARA on training were repealed and provision was made under the MDTA for a supplementary training program for unemployed and underemployed persons residing in areas designated as redevelopment areas by the Secretary of Commerce.
In bringing the ARA training program under MDTA, Congress kept intact the purposes and emphasis of the program.
At the same time, the more liberal provisions of the MDTA regarding duration of training, extent of allowances, and other benefits should overcome the limitations to which occupational training under ARA was subject.
The pattern, emphasis, and direction which the program has taken, along with its accomplishments, will provide a solid foundation on which to build a program of greater scope and magnitude.
The 309 training projects which were approved this year authorized the training of 11,020 persons.
The training activity as a whole covered a cross section of the Nation's economically distressed areas, including industrial centers in the Northeast, former mining communities in Appalachia, rural areas in the South, and Indian reservations in the West.
The approved courses offered training in 87 different occupations.
While the preponderance of the occupations were in the lower skill spectrum, all major occupational groups were represented, from the semiskilled level such as bench assembler to draftsman in the semiprofessional category.
About 89 percent of the enrollees completed their training, resulting in a dropout rate of only 11 percent—significantly less than the 20 to 25 percent rate considered usual for this type of program.
Seventy percent of the "graduates" found employment.
In cooperation with the Bureau of International Labor Affairs, OMAT planned and conducted the Fourth Annual International Seminar on Manpower in Social and Economic Development in June, July, and August 1964, and issued the proceedings of the seminar.
This conference brought together leading economists and manpower experts from 35 emerging nations.
The Office also played a major role in planning the Fifth Annual Seminar held in the summer of 1965.
Charged by the MDTA to "promote, encourage, or directly engage in programs of information and communication concerning manpower requirements, development, and utilization," OMAT continued and strengthened its technical manpower information and communication efforts during fiscal 1965.
It participated in and provided exhibits, displays, and support materials for a wide variety of seminars, workshops, conferences, and conventions.
To meet its responsibility for reporting to the Congress, other Government agencies, and the general public, OMAT published and distributed a number of new publications including a series on manpower seminars and one on the results of contract research.
Among the most important publications were two reports to the Congress— the 1965 “Manpower Report of the President and A Report on Manpower Requirements, Resources, Utilization, and Training by the United States Department of Labor" and the 1965 report of the Secretary of Labor on "Manpower Research and Training Under the MDTA"—plus individual reprints of significant segments of each report. Individual publications included: 'Developing Human Resources Through Occupational Training," a report on training activities under the Area Redevelopment Act; a group of issuances explaining the provisions of the 1965 amendments to the MDTA; manpower research bulletins; evaluation reports on MDTA programs; special reports on automation and the handicapped and on the training needs of the food service industry; and issuances on various aspects of experimental and demonstration programs.
The program of national seminars on manpower policy and programs, begun in 1964, was carried out and renewed for fiscal 1966.
This program provides a platform for the discussion of issues raised in the "Manpower Report of the President" and features addresses by prominent experts from various sectors of society.
Topics included "Policies for the Promotion of Economic Growth" by Gardner Ackley, "Education Automation" by R. Buckminster Fuller, "The Church and the Anti-poverty Program" by Father Benjamin Masse, “Twenty Years of Economic and Industrial Change" by Robert A. Gordon, and "Measurement of Technological Change" by Solomon Fabricant.
Reports on 4 of the 12 seminars of the 1965 programs have been published.
Reports on the others are in preparation.
The National Manpower Advisory Committee is appointed by the Secretary of Labor to advise him and make recommendations on activities under the MDTA.
OMAT provides staff support and assistance to the Committee and its various subcommittees.
The National Manpower Advisory Committee made several recommendations during the year, including recommendations for: Ad hoc survey groups of outside experts to appraise training programs; a search for alternative means for funding experimental and demonstration projects; the establishment of a $1 per hour minimum as a wage policy guideline in retraining for jobs with low wage levels; and expansion of the on-the-job training program.
The Subcommittee on Research, in its review of the evaluation and research program being carried on under title I of the MDTA, recommended several actions for strengthening the Department's efforts.
They included: The development of more careful, well-defined occupational and industrial employment forecasts; a survey of completed research in certain analytical areas to determine gaps in the program; a program of research into the development of jobs for the less able and disadvantaged; and a meeting of agricultural economists to investigate the problems of farm labor and rural population.
The Panel on Counseling and Selection recommended and cooperated with the University of Missouri in planning and conducting an Invitational Conference on Government-University Relations in the Professional Preparation and Employment of Counselors.
The conference produced a set of guidelines to help government agencies and colleges and universities cooperate more effectively in meeting the critical and growing need for qualified counselors in the Nation's schools and to meet the needs of recent manpower legislation.
The Subcommittee on Training recommended the establishment of more State and local manpower advisory committees and recommended studies of the dimensions of unemployment problems among professional workers.
The Subcommittee on Community Relations recommended greater community activity in establishment of local manpower advisory committees, the undertaking of local "Mayor's Manpower Conferences," and the establishment of closer communication between local manpower advisory committees and community action groups under the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964.
During fiscal 1965, four additional regional manpower advisory committees were established—the Southwestern, North Central, Southeastern, and Mountain States Committees.
These four, with the already established Pacific Coast Committee, are part of eight committees proposed to identify the specific manpower problems of given areas and to interest the residents of the areas in those problems.
2 Cancellations are not synonymous with "dropouts," since they include layoffs, discharges, out-of-State transfers, upgrading within certain trades, and suspensions for military service, as well as voluntary "quits." *Major revisions in reporting system effected this year.
1 Covers the months August 1962 through June 1963.
Includes 4,302 persons approved for training as counselor aides under the Counselor-Advisor University Summer Education (CA USÉ) program.
Persons from experimental and demonstration projects approved for on-the-job training.
Several key labor disputes and significant actions relating to the various statutes administered by the Labor-Management Services Administration highlighted a year of intensive activity.
This marked the sixth year of administration by the Department of two disclosure laws in the fields of labor-management relations and employee welfare and pension benefit plans.
Reports now on file in the Office of Labor-Management and Welfare-Pension Reports represent 53,000 labor organizations and 163,500 active employee-benefit plans, plus reports from labor consultants, some union officials, and employers.
The Office continued an active program of technical assistance to bring about voluntary compliance with the two statutes.
Through this method many disputed union elections were resolved without the need for corrective legal action.
Highlighting the year's activities in the Office were several key union elections requiring legal and administrative actions under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act.
Studies relating to manpower utilization, job security, and work force characteristics of longshore workers in 10 east and gulf coast ports were completed by a special staff group assigned to the Assistant Secretary for Labor-Management Relations.
The results of the studies were presented to representatives of the union and management for each port in a series of joint meetings.
Reports of the findings for the individual ports were made available to the parties for use in negotiations.
By March, agreements had been reached in all ports, and significant manpower utilization and job security changes were incorporated into the collective bargaining agreements for several key ports.
Executives of Federal agencies and leaders of labor organizations representing Federal employees are relying increasingly upon the Office of Federal Employee-Management Relations for aid in solving problems of appropriateness of the bargaining unit or of majority determinations in elections.
Reliance upon this Office (which administers the Secretary of Labor's responsibility under Executive Order 10988, Federal Employee-Management Cooperation) for appropriate advice on employee-management matters has substantially reduced costly arbitration procedures and encouraged the amicable resolution of questions in these areas.
Under revised and automated procedures the Office of Veterans’ Reemployment Rights has significantly reduced paperwork requirements of preservice employers of veterans, thus laying the groundwork for earlier and more harmonious return of the veteran to his former position.
This new program has meant savings for the employer in time and letter writing and for the Government in reduced clerical expense, while at the same time assuring more personalized service for the returning serviceman.
The Labor-Management Services Administration has continued through the year to assist ad hoc Presidential boards and commissions where the Department's services are required.
Other activities include participation in or staff support for the President's Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy, the President's Maritime Advisory Committee, the Grievance Committee on Cargo Preference, and the Interagency Committee on Transportation Mergers; liaison and consultation with the National Labor Relations Board, the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, and the National Mediation Board; and carrying out the responsibilities delegated to the Secretary of Labor under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964.
The Office of Federal Employee-Management Relations performs under Executive Order No. 10988 the functions of the Secretary contained in section 11 of the order, including (1) handling agency or employee organization requests for the nomination of arbitrators in cases involving appropriateness of units for the purpose of exclusive recognition or questions as to majority status determinations and (2) giving such assistance as may be appropriate to Federal agencies in connection with advisory decisions or determinations.
There has been a substantial increase during the year in the educational activities conducted by Federal agencies and labor organizations dealing with employee-management cooperation under the order.
Conferences have also been held by bar associations and organizations of Federal personnel administrators to appraise how the order has worked since its signing on January 17, 1962, both to improve the lot of the Federal worker and to improve the quality of the public service.
Participation in these programs has been an important feature of the year's activities by this office.
During the year, advisory and technical assistance was provided to assist in the developing of sound principles and practices for meaningful, constructive employee-management relations in Federal agencies.
The result of general educational efforts related to the order are discernible in the decrease in the number of disputes which lead to requests for arbitrators, and in the overall stability of relationships between management officials and union representatives—an important indication that the overriding purpose of the order is being vindicated by increasing cooperation between Federal management and employees.
The Office processed 26 requests for the nomination of arbitrators filed by Federal agencies and employee organizations; 17 arbitrators were selected and 13 advisory decisions issued.
Multiple requests involving the same installations were consolidated to avoid unnecessary costs or delays.
This resulted in four requests for arbitration being considered in two proceedings.
A summary of an analysis of more than 200 bargaining agreements under the order by late summer 1964 was issued on the third anniversary of the order.
The complete analysis was to be released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics early in fiscal year 1966.)
The summary showed that almost 600,000 Federal employees were covered by agreements representing 35 employee organizations.
Many organizations were craft unions, representing skilled blue-collar Government employees; workers in the postal service make up about 75 percent of the total covered under all agreements.
The findings reported in the summary indicate that the philosophy of good labor-management relations is being effectively and extensively carried out within the Federal Government.
The Office of Labor-Management and Welfare-Pension Reports (LMWP) administers those sections of two statutes for which the Secretary of Labor has enforcement responsibility.
One is the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act.
The other is the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act.
The two statutes require reporting by unions on their financial transactions and, under some circumstances, by employers and labor relations consultants, and union officers and employees.
Administrators of private welfare and pension plans are required to file descriptions of plan provisions, and annual financial reports for public information.
With both disclosure laws, the Department emphasizes voluntary compliance.
Compliance and technical assistance activities are directed by 5 regional offices through a field staff assigned to area offices located in 24 cities.
Field activities are further decentralized through 12 resident offices, where a compliance officer is assigned to make the agency's services more accessible.
A new resident office was opened during the year at Houston, Tex.
In addition to other technical assistance activities, staff personnel in field offices answered 96,360 mail, telephone, and in-person inquiries and made 7,901 contacts, consisting of staff-initiated visits to persons in organizations affected by the statutes, to offer assistance or information and publications concerning the two laws.
In the sixth year of the administration of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act, the number of active labor organizations filing reports with the Office increased to nearly 53,000.
This year, 1,675 unions filed initial reports, and 975 termination reports were received.
See table 1.)
Public disclosure files of labor and management reports are maintained in the 24 LMWP area offices as well as the national office.
In a continuing effort to promote understanding of the act's requirements, LMWP conducted 100 workshops and meetings on union reporting, election provisions, and employer and consultant reporting requirements.
These were attended by 2,500 persons.
LMWP staff participated in 100 union conventions and an additional 135 union meetings and conferences, providing speakers and pamphlets and other educational material relating to the act.
Publications and technical assistance aids also were distributed locally to assist union officials in maintaining financial and election data, and to increase the knowledge of reporting requirements by labor and management officials.