I report on a year of unprecedented progress for working Americans.
On the social and economic fronts, 1966 brought great fulfillment and bright new hope for many.
It was a year of monumental challenge for all.
It will be chronicled as a year in which the Nation accelerated its already quick pace toward extending its wealth and advantages to those it has bypassed for so long.
The Department of Labor, in its 54th year of service, figured prominently in our national efforts to improve the general welfare of all working Americans.
Once, America's concerted efforts were focused solely on achieving the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
But that was not enough.
In 1966, carrying out the will of the majority, the Nation intensified its efforts to insure that not a single American would be denied what most citizens have long enjoyed.
Employment rose by 2 million.
The jobless rate was 4 percent or lower in every month of the second half of the fiscal year—the lowest level for so extended a period in the past 12 years.
Average weekly earnings of a factory worker rose 4.6 percent during the year to a record high of $112.74 in June 1966.
Yet, as total employment pushed to new heights and the jobless rate edged downward, there remained an ugly paradox in America—a sizable body of hardcore unemployed persons.
Also persisting in this country was the specter of poverty—afflicting millions of citizens—amidst the most vigorous economic upsurge in U.S. history.
These deplorable conditions marred America's journey to greatness.
They stood as obstacles on the way to the Great Society envisioned by President Johnson.
The essential greatness of a society lies in its commitment to the idea of its own perfectibility, with no reservations.
In the realm of employment, such a commitment has a special ring of urgency.
For the cry of the unemployed, like a mighty chorus of discontent, is for jobs.
And jobs now!
In 1966, there was recognition by the American public that 5 years of unprecedented economic growth had brought us far but that the latent talent of too many remained untapped.
It was apparent that prosperity's unemployment is something happening to young people, Negroes, and victims of other forms of disadvantage—usually not of their own making.
It also appeared unlikely that unemployment among these groups—those in which it was most serious—would be reduced substantially below present levels by any foreseeable economic expansion.
There were no easy—nor speedy—solutions to the myriad of problems of the jobless: Inadequate education, lack of skills, advancing age, physical or mental handicaps, bigotry.
What was required to meet the many facets of unemployment was a more personal, a more individual approach.
Heretofore, in America, we always seemed to tackle our manpower problems by starting with jobs and, then, working back to people.
That approach was archaic.
So, in 1966, we began an approach that starts with people, not jobs—a human resources development program.
It involved individual communities getting down to a case-by-case treatment of unemployment by finding out who the jobless are, by name and address, what their abilities and desirabilities are, and what training they need as individuals to make them useful to themselves and the community.
Services which must be made available in this vital program include vocational counseling, job referrals, basic educational or occupational training, or referral to other agencies for needed help, such as medical, psychological, or legal aid.
To achieve success in this individual approach, it was important that we recognize that there exists in America a tragic gap between the half-truth of civil rights and the ultimate goal of civil results.
Employment offered a classic example of this gulf.
We had passed a historic measure—the Civil Rights Act of 1964—as a mighty and humane bulwark against job discrimination and other forms of prejudice.
But laws, and enforcement of these laws, are not enough to break down the barriers preventing equal job opportunity.
There is, for example, something drastically wrong if one man, who is turned away from a factory gate because he is a Negro, is accepted by the law as a proper party plaintiff, while another, who is turned back because he is untrained, is not a proper party plaintiff even though the reason he is untrained is that he was born in a ghetto and his education was as unequal as it was separate.
For the two cases are the same, except that an employer did the discriminating in one case and the society did it in the other.
If a person has been put at a disadvantage in employment because of society’s denial of the fair chance to prepare himself, this is as much a matter warranting redress as if he is denied a job through overt discrimination.
To overcome the problem of disadvantage, the result of the broad discrimination the society as a whole has practiced, the society, acting through government processes, must undertake programs of affirmative action.
The primary battlefront for attacking the problem is, unquestionably, in education.
There is every reason to grant preference in education to those who have watched others receive preference in the past.
But this need not—and should not—be done on racial lines.
For disadvantage is the one thing in our society that has long been integrated.
We know today, as we have not before, that—except for individual cases— there is only a single difference between human beings.
The rest are lies we taught ourselves: Differences in skin color, religion, national origin.
Our belief in the future—that there will be a future—hinges on the fact that the one real difference is curable.
That difference is solely in opportunity, especially in education and preparation.
Our challenge is to provide every person in America with the same educational opportunities and motivations for future prospects.
Only then will be built a better society.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration directs and coordinates the management of the Department in the following functional areas: Library, management systems, financial systems, budget, organization, personnel, administrative services, and program review and analysis.
During fiscal year 1966, major emphasis was placed on the adoption of innovative management systems throughout the Department.
In addition to providing the bureaus with various administrative services to support their operations, the Office implemented improved management techniques and systems.
These were an outgrowth of long-range goals to raise the level of management in the Department and to respond to administrative policies and programs emanating from executive staff agencies.
Particular emphasis was placed on extending the scope and contribution of the program budget management system and on reducing marginal expenditures and costs of programs.
Savings accrued by adopting a strong questioning attitude toward expenditures and by devising more economical ways to attain program objectives.
Planning was launched in the area of information and data systems.
The Library continued its service to the Department and the public.
Activities increased over the preceding year, requiring the answering of 37,486 requests for information and material; over 14,000 of these requests were for items included on the weekly accession list.
The Ofice of the Assistant Secretary for Administration has placed the highest priority over the past few years in seeking to elevate the level of management in the Department to a position from which it can successfully meet the challenges arising during a dynamic period of growth.
This has required adjusting techniques and programs to meet new conditions and developing management systems that will function within an increasingly complex administrative environment.
The keystone of these efforts has been through strengthening the Department's program budget management system (PBMS) in the direction of achieving a comprehensive and integrated departmental management system.
This system was in operation for the first time during the 1966 fiscal year.
As a relatively new system, it was subjected to continual modification and refinement as dictated by experience during its implementation.
It was further modified to take cognizance of the Presidential decision requiring a planning, programing, budgeting process on a Government-wide basis and of specific Bureau of the Budget instructions for implementing the decision.
To enhance both the scope and value of PBMS, work progressed in the following areas: Relating to the total resources expenditures with basic national economic and social needs; integrating the planning function with the budgetary process and control of funding programs in terms of PBMS program categories; extending the system into bureau operations; and integrating the program review and analysis function into the system.
In addition, a decision was made to extend the basic system concept to State agency operations.
In the category of developmental work, the Department began a number of projects to assure that top officials would receive more accurate and pertinent management information and data for their use in making program decisions.
The growing magnitude and complexity of the data being generated has made it desirable to provide more systematically for collecting, organizing, summarizing, evaluating, and presenting the information needs by top management.
Two distinct but related projects were undertaken.
A data systems policy and planning staff was established to develop a cohesive data systems program covering all activities of the Department of Labor and State employment security agencies whose administrative costs are paid wholly out of Federal funds.
Several large-scale data systems studies were approved and work was begun on them.
The two most significant of these were (1) a total data systems study of all of the Department's programs and their operations and (2) a comprehensive data systems study of the Bureau of Employment Security's Federal-State programs.
The objective of these studies is the establishment of a total data systems program for the Department of Labor utilizing the latest computer technology and other modern management sciences to improve the Department's operations and its services to the public.
A second project was the developmental work related to the establishment of a management information system for the Office of the Secretary.
The first phase of this effort involved an analysis of the existing flow of information to top management, determination of its relevancy, and the devising of a conceptual framework for the system that will assure that policy and program decisions that are made are based on timely, well-documented, and fully evaluated information.
The initial conceptual and developmental work thus far completed represents the crucial first steps in what promises to become a significant system for the better management and utilization of the vast volume of data now available.
The emphasis given in the budget area by the Offce of the Assistant Secretary for Administration was to províde program managers with leadership and assistance in establishing priorities among alternative program proposals and in allocating funds to finance them.
The allocation of resources was especially difficult because of intense pressures for commitments to new and expanded program requirements while pressures continued to identify and eliminate nonessential programs.
New obligational authority was kept to about a 4-percent increase over the preceding fiscal year, or a total of $1,213 million.
Of this amount, 58.1 percent was derived from general funds of the Treasury and 41.9 percent from trust fund authorizations.
Table 1 shows the 1966 appropriations by program.
The particular concern of the President and the Secretary in reducing travel and employment costs stimulated the further development of strong internal measures and instructions to control these particular expenditures.
To improve overall budgeting skills and specifically to relate budgeting to the requirements of the program budget management system, considerable training was given to Bureau budget personnel during the fiscal year.
Because funds for new and expanded programs were not readily available, a premium was placed on freeing funds through more economical management of existing programs.
In its management improvement and cost reduction program, the Department was able to save approximately $6 million during the fiscal vear.
This permitted increased contribution to Great Society and other high priority programs.
The concerted attention repeatedly devoted in this program has resulted in a cost-conscious attitude among program managers, thus reinforcing the operation of the program budget management system.
The centralization of appropriation-allotment accounting activities, using an electronic computer for processing and report preparation, was completed.
This important phase of accounting systems development is the first step in a longrange program to establish a cost-based system, on an accrual basis, through which all funds made available to or leaving the Department are placed under strict accounting control.
The Department's organizational structure is constantly reviewed to take into consideration new programs or changes in programs.
Though many adjustments were involved in the fiscal year, there were a few of special note.
One involved the realinement of occupational health and safety functions.
Under the reorganization, the Bureau of Labor Standards assumed responsibility for safety and health enforcement activities formerly carried out by the Wage and Hour and Public Contracts Divisions.
The consolidation is expected to result in a stronger and more coordinated occupational safety and health program.
In addition, the Office of Manpower Policy, Evaluation, and Research was established, replacing the Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training in the Manpower Administration.
The change will provide the Manpower Administrator with an analytical staff capability of greater depth.
It was also the culmination of a series of modifications designed to place operating program responsibility within a limited number of organizations within the Manpower Administration.
The Department also continued its decentralization of personnel functions to regional centers by opening regional administrative offices in Dallas and Kansas City.
In addition, the Atlanta, Chicago, and New York offices were assigned responsibility to provide personnel services previously performed in the headquarters.
Greater authority in procurement, space management, and property management was given to field installations.
An Office of Management Services, reporting to the Assistant Secretary for Administration, was established to provide the Office of the Secretary with better coordinated and more extensive management support services.
Personnel management is the responsibility of program managers.
Personnel management services are performed by operating bureaus, whose work is supplemented by a departmental personnel staff responsible for departmentwide personnel policies and standards, recruiting and training, and certain advisory services.
To keep top management informed of the relative effectiveness of their personnel management programs, a new personnel inspection program was put into effect.
Evaluations based on a "personnel management evaluation guide," providing bureaus with a statement of goals and objectives of personnel management, were made of two bureau programs, and corrective action was recommended.
Formal training programs were among the major activities undertaken to make full use of staff resources.
Special emphasis was given in fiscal year 1966 to the development of managers and supervisors; over 400 of these officials, many in levels GS-15 and above, were given training.
An important part of their instruction was to familiarize them with the theory and practice of the President's new planning, programing, and budgeting system.
Training programs, however, are only one aspect of the Department's interest in achieving better utilization and development of its employees.
Counseling services were expanded, and this enabled the Department to provide employees with a greater measure of individual help in adjusting to the requirements of their job.
While many cases were handled by the operating offices, 102 were sufficiently complex to require counseling at the departmental level.
Strong support was given to the President's cost effectiveness program by controlling unwarranted escalation of employees' grades and by paying close attention to position management objectives within the Department.
As a result, the average grade of full-time employees decreased during the year.
Total employment within the Department during the fiscal year was held to an increase of approximately 5 percent.
The specific employment figures by major organization are shown in table 2.
The Department continued to lead the way in providing equal employment opportunity to members of minority groups.
Efforts were made not merely to find and hire minority group candidates but to employ them in middle- and toplevel positions.
The results show that 58 percent of the minority group employees are now serving at or above the entrance level for professional employees, as compared with 31 percent in 1961.
In a nationwide ballot, the National Council of Field Labor Lodges won its bid for exclusive recognition as bargaining agent for field employees.
Labor Lodge 12, of the American Federation of Government Employees (AFL-CIO), had already been granted exclusive recognition for most employees in Washington, D.C. This means that now all eligible employees of the Department are in units represented by unions which have been granted exclusive recognition.
Regular consultations were held between these employee unions and management within the framework of Executive Order 10988 on employee-management cooperation in the Federal service.
While providing a full range of administrative services (supply, space, printing, contracting, mail, etc.) in support of bureau operations, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration has endeavored to expand and improve facilities.
At the behest of a Presidential directive to improve services and communications with the public.
As part of the contribution of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration in its internal program, training was conducted for individuals likely to come into contact with the public, and public information desks were established in regional office cities.
To further update services, a systems study of the mailing of printed matter was made and a decision reached to set up a centralized mailing capability for all bureaus.
Steps were taken to bring about the operation of the service during the coming year.
Related to better communication to expedite the collection of data and reports, a teletype network, called the advanced records system, was set up to connect field installations of the Farm Labor Service with the national office.
The network was subsequently expanded to meet the needs of field offices of the Neighborhood Youth Corps.
The Office of Information, Publications, and Reports publishes a wealth of information geared to keep the man in the street tuned in to the activities, policies, and programs of the Labor Department.
Through a variety of media—publications, news releases, visual aids, and people-to-people programs—the Office keeps the public informed about everything from the Department's manpower programs to economic data affecting nearly every working American.
Acting as the press center for the Department, the Information Office issues hundreds of news releases concerning Department personnel and events, policy, and new programs.
Weekly press packets are compiled and distributed to some 4,000 newspapers and magazines across the country.
In addition, the Office handles thousands of verbal and written requests for Department information.
On a regular basis, the Information Office releases data on important national economic developments, such as the weekly and monthly wholesale price indexes, the monthly Consumer Price Index, and the monthly employment figures.
The publications office compiles and edits a variety of publications, such as a periodic booklet describing the structure and functions of the Department and a list of publications.
In addition, the staff reviews publications issued by the bureaus and offices to check their consistency with Department policy and objectives.
Each year, the division also handles thousands of publications inquiries from a cross-section of the public—students, businessmen, union officials, and foreign embassy personnel.
The visual media are a vital part of the Department's link with the public.
Yearly, the visual services division of the Office of Information, Publications, and Reports designs and produces book and pamphlet covers, mobile displays, training charts and posters, and television spot slide films.
Some of these visual aids are used in the permanent Department of Labor exhibit hall.
An important project in the past year was the Joint National Aeronautics and Space Administration and Department of Labor exhibit depicting the participation of the two agencies in the Nation's manpower program.
The public also viewed a number of smaller exhibits, contributed by the Department to various labor union, educational, professional, and technical conventions.
As still another means of reaching the public, many Department representatives speak to groups of adults and teenagers on such timely subjects as the importance of education and training in qualifying for a useful role in today's labor force.
The Solicitor, as the chief legal officer of the Department as well as a policy official and adviser, is responsible for legal matters relating to the various programs and activities conducted by the Department.
He acts as adviser to the Secretary, Under Secretary, and Assistant Secretaries and performs varied types of legal services required by the Department's different bureaus and offices in carrying out their particular responsibilities.
One of the more significant functions performed by the Solicitor is the handling of legal proceedings in connection with the laws administered and enforced by the Department.
In his role as legal adviser to the Secretary, the Solicitor assists in the formulation and preparation of the Department's legislative program, which involves appearances of the Secretary before congressional committees.
The Solicitor also performs operating functions in connection with the administration and enforcement of the Davis-Bacon Act and related statutes involving the predetermination and payment of prevailing wages on Federal and federally financed and assisted construction projects.
He also exercises final authority in matters of tort claims involving the Department.
The immediate Office of the Solicitor consists of the Solicitor, the Deputy Solicitor, and several attorneys who act as special assistants assigned to the handling of special legal problems.
The legal staff of the Solicitor in the Washington office is composed of six divisions, with an associate solicitor responsible for each.
In addition to the Washington staff, the Solicitor discharges his responsibilities, principally in litigation matters, through regional attorneys and their staffs located in field offices throughout the continental United States and Puerto Rico.
The primary function of the Division of Legislation is to advise and assist the Solicitor of Labor in discharging his responsibilities as chief legal adviser to the Secretary on legislative matters.
The Division is responsible for preparing the Department's legislative program as well as participating in its formulation.
An important function performed by the Division, in guiding and managing the Department's efforts through the complex phases of the legislative process, is that of providing special legal counsel and assistance to the Secretary in connection with his personal appearances before congressional committees on legislation of interest to the Department.
In addition, the Division furnishes technical legal services to congressional committees.
Another Division responsibility is preparing written reports conveying the Department's views to the Bureau of the Budget and congressional committees on a variety of proposed and pending legislation.
Because of the diversified content of legislative proposals, the Division works not only with the various bureaus and offices of the Department, but also with other agencies of the Government.
This work continued at a high level of activity during fiscal 1966.
The Division in fiscal 1966 worked closely with the Division of Interpretations and Opinions in lending technical assistance and advice to the House and Senate committees in their deliberations regarding the unemployment insurance amendments.
One of the more important activities of the Division during the year was that of advising and assisting the Secretary in connection with his testimony on the unemployment insurance amendments; the amendments to expand and strengthen the Manpower Development and Training Act, as amended by the Manpower Act of 1965; and the proposals to broaden the scope of the U.S. Employment Service and improve the nature of its services.
The Division also furnished technical services to the congressional committees which considered these measures.
Further, the Division prepared the testimony of the Solicitor in connection with his appearance before a House committee in support of the liberalizing amendments to the Federal Employees' Compensation Act which were enacted during fiscal 1966 (Public Law 89–488).
The Division's staff also drafted the testimony of the Assistant Secretary for Labor Standards in connection with her appearance in support of the amendments on the Senate side; and provided technical services regarding this legislation to both House and Senate committees.
Another significant accomplishment of the Division in fiscal 1966 was its work relating to the amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act, including its technical assistance to the House and Senate committees considering the amendments.
The Division also assisted the Senate committee in its consideration of a proposed extensive revision of the District of Columbia minimum wage law.
The enactment in fiscal 1966 of the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act of 1965 marked the successful conclusion of the Division's long efforts in support of legislation providing labor standards protection for those employed on Federal service contracts.
The Division continued to collaborate with, and furnish special counsel and legal advice to, the Assistant Secretary, the Director of the Women's Bureau, and other officials directing the activities of the Interdepartmental Committee on the Status of Women and to the Citizens' Advisory Council of that committee.
It also continued to furnish assistance in coordinating the activities of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and of the Department that relate to women's employment under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The staff attorneys concerned with labor-management relations rendered valuable assistance to the Department's efforts in support of bills to repeal section 14(b) of the Taft-Hartley Act and to permit common situs construction picketing.
The Division's attorneys engaged in legal services are responsible for providing advisory legal services to the Office of the Secretary and other departmental offices and bureaus not otherwise serviced and for preparing letters for the signature of departmental officials.
During the year, the staff prepared 737 analyses, memorandums, and orders, 754 letters for the Secretary's signature, and 2,807 letters for the signature of the Solicitor.
In addition, it performed other legal functions such as reviewing contracts entered into by the Department; and consultation on questions concerning conflicts of interests, disclosure of information, and other fields of law.
The hearing examiners held 64 hearings during the year pursuant to various laws administered by the Department of Labor.
Of these, 51 involved alleged violations of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act; 36 decisions were rendered in these cases.
The staff writes decisions for: (1) The Employees' Compensation Appeals Board in the administration of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, (2) the Secretary of Labor and the Administrator of the Wage and Hour and Public Contracts Divisions in connection with the administration of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and (3) the Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards in appeals from hearing examiners' decisions on violations of safety regulations issued pursuant to the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
It also provides a variety of other legal services with respect to problems arising under these statutes.
Two hundred and seventy-eight decisions were written during the year, and the backlog of only 68 pending cases set a record for this activity.
During the past year, an attorney in the Division served as executive secretary to the Department's Wage Appeals Board, which has authority to review decisions of the Solicitor under the Davis-Bacon Act and related legislation.
The staff was also engaged during fiscal 1966 in preparing digests of key opinions recently rendered under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, the Fair Labor Standards Act, and other labor standards laws; and reports and miscellaneous legal documents.
Supplement I to the "Index Digest of Decisions of the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board" was printed, thus completing the digest through fiscal year 1964.
The Division of Interpretations and Opinions provides legal services and advice, primarily in the form of written and oral opinions, to the various operating bureaus of the Department of Labor, to the regional offices, to other Government agencies, and to the general public.
These opinions set forth the position of the Department and are used as a basis for the administration of programs, compliance and enforcement activities, and also for labor-management negotiations.
The Division provides general administrative legal services for the Department's programs and the legal advisory services required for programs concerned with such matters as employment and unemployment; manpower; labor standards for construction, supply, and service contracts; Federal regulation of wages, hours, child labor, and workers' safety; workmen's compensation; and veterans' reemployment rights.
The number of matters for which advice and other legal services were provided by the Division increased over last year by more than 12 percent.
These included, in addition to matters submitted for legal review or for opinion on legal questions, the preparation of regulations, certain necessary legal documents, legislative materials, legal services for administrative hearings, and litigation assistance.
The scope and character of the matters dealt with continued to expand and change.
Program areas were broadened under recently enacted legislation requiring legal interpretations, regulations, and other implementation through legal services.
In the labor standards area, a major source of increased activity during the latter half of the year was the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act of 1965, which became fully effective in January in its application to contracting for services by the agencies of the Federal Government and the District of Columbia.
For contracts in excess of $2,500 entered into by such agencies, the act prescribes provisions requiring contractors and subcontractors furnishing services through the use of service employees to pay such employees minimum monetary wages and fringe benefits as determined by the Secretary of Labor in accordance with those prevailing for such employees in the locality.
It also prescribes that working conditions meet minimum safety and health standards.
Regulations implementing this act were drafted after consultation with Government procurement agencies; and interpretative advice on numerous legal questions in connection with the regulations was provided.
For another new statute, the National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities Act, the Division participated with interested agencies in drafting proposed regulations to implement its provisions for wage, fringe benefit, and safety standards for workers in the performing arts who are engaged in projects assisted by Federal grants.
Other activities in the labor standards area during the year included preparing and publishing in the Federal Register a revised and more comprehensive interpretative bulletin on the provisions prohibiting discrimination in wages on account of sex, added to the Fair Labor Standards Act by the Equal Pay Act of 1963; revising regulations that provide safety standards for maritime workers subject to the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act; and issuing new minimum wage orders for industries in Puerto Rico, American Samoa, and the Virgin Islands pursuant to industry committee action under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Also completed during the year were revisions of the regulations dealing with labor standards on construction contracts subject to the Davis-Bacon Act and related statutes, promulgated pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 1950.
These, together with revisions made during the preceding year, were required to make effective the recent legislation in this area including the fringe benefits amendments to the Davis-Bacon Act and the enactment of the Contract Work Hours Standards Act.
A considerable volume of interpretative advice under these recent statutes was also given during the year.
Questions arising under the Fair Labor Standards Act, its recent amendments, and those being considered in the Congress continued to provide a major part of the Division's workload in the labor standards area.
Demands for legal advisory services relating to manpower matters continued at a high level commensurate with the Department's program activity in this area.
A large volume of opinions, interpretations, and other legal services was furnished under the Wagner-Pevser Act, which establishes the Federal-State employment service system; under the Manpower Development and Training Act, which provides training and training allowances for the unemployed and underemplcyed; under those provisions of the Economic Opportunity Act which provide work training for youth through the Department's Neighborhood Youth Corps; and under the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act, which requires the registration of certain farm labor contractors.
Activity in the manpower area was increased by the amendment of the Immigration and Nationality Act which took effect on December 3, 1965, and which requires, as a condition to the issuance of a visa to an alien seeking admission to this country for the purpose of performing skilled or unskilled labor, that the Department of Labor determine and certify that the admission of such alien would not adversely affect the wages and working conditions of U.S. workers similarly employed and that U.S. workers are not available to perform that employment.
This involved the drafting and issuance of additional regulations and added interpretative work.
In the veterans' reemployment rights area, 80 potential litigation cases were referred to the Department of Justice during the year.
On February 28, 1966, the Supreme Court, in Accardi v. Pennsylvania Railroad Company, 383 U.S. 225, further clarified certain basic principles involved in affording proper restoration to returning servicemen.
That decision resulted in the voluntary adjustment of a substantial number of statutory claims.
One hundred and twenty documents were prepared and published in the Federal Register pursuant to provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act and the Federal Register Act.
Of these, 51 provided new or amended provisions in the Code of Federal Regulations.
The Division rendered opinions and provided legal services on a number of matters in the area of unemployment compensation during fiscal year 1966.
This work involved the Federal Unemployment Tax Act, the Social Security Act, the trade readjustment allowance provisions of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, and the Automotive Products Trade Act of 1965.
The legislatures of 35 States were in session during the year, and the Division reviewed, commented upon, and gave advice as to whether proposals and enactments met the requirements of Federal law under the Social Security Act and the Federal Unemployment Tax Act.
The regulations applicable to the payment of unemployment compensation benefits in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands for Federal employees and ex-servicemen were amended to take account of a recent change in the Federal law applicable to payment of benefits in Puerto Rico.
Also, regulations were prepared to implement the provisions of the Automotive Products Trade Act of 1965, for payment of trade readjustment allowances to workers unemployed or underemployed because of the operations of the executive agreement of January 16, 1965, between Canada and the United States.
Allowances are those provided in the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, and certification that workers are eligible to apply for allowances is vested in the Automotive Agreement Adjustment Assistance Board.
The Office of the Solicitor also provides legal services in connection with the international responsibilities of the Department, primarily through or under the supervision of the Office of the Special Assistant to the Solicitor for International Affairs.
During fiscal year 1966, services were provided with respect to tariffs and the trade agreements program; and with respect to the International Labor Organization and other international economic problems and activities within the general responsibility of the Department's Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB).
Legal advice and services pertaining to tariff and trade agreement matters were furnished to the Department's Committee on Foreign Economic Policy and the ILAB Division of Foreign Economic Policy, and in connection with the Department's participation in the interagency committee structure under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
The Office also participated in the review and preparation of proposed positions and reports on pending legislation dealing with various changes in the U.S. tariff schedules and with other treatment of imports.
The Office was also involved in interagency activities relating to the development of regulations, organization, procedures, and activities of the Cabinet-level Automotive Agreement Adjustment Assistance Board established pursuant to the Automotive Products Act of 1965.
The Board determines, on application, whether groups of workers or individual firms in the automotive products industry are eligible to apply for adjustment assistance by reason of unemployment or underemployment arising out of the operation of the United States-Canadian agreement of January 16, 1965, providing for the mutual elimination of the duties on importation of new motor vehicles and original automotive equipment.
During the fiscal year, the Board made and issued two affirmative determinations and certifications of eligibility on worker petitions.
Legal services in relation to the International Labor Organization include review and preparation of law and practice reports, proposed executive branch position letters on conventions and recommendations adopted by the ILO, and amendments to the ILO constitution and other documents.
During the fiscal year, legal services were also provided in developing and carrying forward the executive branch position which recommended seeking the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification of the ILO convention No. 122 concerning employment policy.
A member of the Solicitor's staff participated in the 50th session of the International Labor conference in Geneva, serving as technical adviser to the U.S. delegation there.
The Division of Wage Determinations is responsible for the administration of the Davis-Bacon Act, including the Fringe Benefits Amendment of 1964 and its related prevailing wage statutes, the Contract Work Hours Standards Act, the Copeland Act, and Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 1950.
The Division's Branch of Wage Determinations determines minimum wage and fringe benefits to be paid laborers and mechanics on Federal and federally assisted construction under contracts subject to the Davis-Bacon Act and related laws.
The Division's Branch of Coordination and Enforcement carries out the functions established by Reorganization Plan No. 14 of 1950, which authorizes the Secretary to provide coordination of administration and consistency in the enforcement of the statutes covered by the plan.
Improvements in the administration of the Davis-Bacon Act continue to be made, and their effectiveness is reflected in the Division's achievements during fiscal vear 1966.
The Branch of Wage Determinations issued 25,938 wage determinations.
This was a slight increase over the number of determinations issued in the previous vear: the small increase was primarily the result of the enactment of additional federally assisted programs.
A significant factor which prevented the issuance of a substantially greater volume of wage determinations was the expansion of the multiagency area wage determinations to cover 333 areas, an over-the-year increase of 113.
Work continued on the establishment of a new uniform record system to provide more accurate and complete data for wage determinations.
A total of 44,208 pieces of correspondence were issued in connection with the wage determinations.
The Branch of Coordination and Enforcement opened 1,032 enforcement cases.
A total of 1.035 cases were processed to completion.
Ineligibility sanctions were imposed against 17 contractors for serious violations of prevailing wage statutes.
As a result of enforcement actions, restitution totaling $375,992.23 was obtained for 3,766 employees.
Penalties under the Contract Work Hours Standards Act amounted to $35,655.00.
Another indication of the marked improvement of the Division's administration of the Davis-Bacon Act is the fact that the Wage Appeals Board, which reviews decisions of the Solicitor under the Davis-Bacon Act and related acts, heard only two cases this year; five appeals were taken to the Board last year.
In the Griffith Company case (WAB case No. 64–3, July 1, 1965), the Board held that emplovees of equipment rental dealers are protected by the Davis-Bacon provisions of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 when working on the construction site, but directed that a careful examination of prevailing local practices should be made to determine whether "shop" or other rates should be required as minimum wages.
In the Vicon case (WAB case No. 65–3, Dec. 15, 1965), the Board held that evidence of the conduct of a contractor as to compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act and the related overtime legislation is relevant in determining whether or not the contractor is currently responsible with regard to complying with this legislation, and consequently whether or not regulatory debarment should be imposed under the applicable debarment rules of the Secretary of Labor (pt. 5 of title 29, Code of Federal Regulations).
The Litigation Division is primarily responsible for the Department's litigation and quasi-litigation matters.
This responsibility is discharged principally in connection with the enforcement of labor standards legislation (Fair Labor Standards Act, including the Equal Pay Act, the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act), workmen's compensation legislation (Federal Employees' Compensation Act, Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, and the District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Act, among others), and maritime safety legislation (Public Law 85– 742, 72 Stat. 835).
A new record high number of 1,672 cases were instituted this year under the Fair Labor Standards Act and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Of the 1,609 civil actions filed, 1,532 were brought under sections 16(c) or 17 of the Fair Labor Standards Act or section 2 of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and 77 represented other civil actions.
Criminal prosecutions were instituted in 25 cases.
There were 38 new administrative proceedings before hearing examiners under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
A total of 1,482 cases were closed with pavment of back wages to employees being ordered or agreed to in 721 cases.
Sixteen criminal prosecutions and 68 contempt actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act were disposed of and 44 Walsh-Healey administrative proceedings were concluded.
Fines totaling $48,418 were obtained in criminal and contempt cases.
Restitution of back wages obtained through the efforts of the Office of the Solicitor amounted to $3,846,959 under the Fair Labor Standards Act and $118,449 under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
A total of 1,329 permanent injunctions were obtained, 1,169 of them after contest.
Forty-three briefs were filed in appellate proceedings under the Fair Labor Standards Act and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, four in the U.S. Supreme Court, one in a State appellate court, and the remainder in the U.S. courts of appeals for the various circuits.
Eighteen decisions were handed down by the appellate courts.
The Department's position was sustained in 15 of these and rejected in 3.
In addition, three petitions for certiorari opposed by the Department were denied by the Supreme Court.
In Idaho Sheet Metal Works, Inc. v. Wirtz and Wirtz v. Steepleton General Tire Co., 383 U.S. 190, the Supreme Court upheld the Department's position that the businesses involved were not exempt “retail or service establishments" within the meaning of section 13(a)(2) of the Fair Labor Standards Act. The establishment concerned in Idaho Sheet Metal was a sheet-metal fabrication plant, 83 percent of whose income was derived from the sale of potato processing equipment. The Court ruled that sales of industrial machinery such as that produced by the defendant company can never qualify as retail, whatever the terms of sale and regardless of the industry's own classification of such sales. In Steepleton, the Court held that a tire dealership which made substantial sales at discount prices to fleet owners did not qualify for the retail exemption. The Court in that case relied heavily upon guidelines which had been issued by the Secretary for the tire industry, pointing out that the Secretary's classification of quantity sales at discount prices as nonretail is consistent with “the common conception of the term retail and references in the legislative history to discount sales."
The Court emphasized that industry terminology or usage of the term "retail" is not the determining factor.
Appellate decisions concerning other exemption provisions of the FLSA were: Boyls v. Wirtz, 352 F. 2d 63, in which the Fifth Circuit held that off-the-farm employees of a crop-dusting service were not exempt from the act as agricultural workers and Wirtz v. Charleston Coca Cola Bottling Company, 356 F. 2d 428, in which the Fourth Circuit held that route helpers performing manual labor on trucks for delivering soft drinks did not qualify as "outside salesmen" under the act's section 13(a)(1).
A number of significant victories involved the enforcement provisions of the FLSA.
In Burk Builders v. Wirtz, 355 F. 2d 451, the Fifth Circuit upheld the district court's equitable power to order that back wages not distributed to employees within a reasonable time should be "covered into the Treasury of the United States" and could not be retained by the employer.
In Pierce v. Concrete Products Corporation, 186 So.
2d 751, the Supreme Court of Mississippi held that it was mandatory for the trial court to award attorney's fees to the successful claimant in a suit under section 16(b) of the FLSA, and that the trial court should also have awarded liquidated damages where the defendant employer had offered no evidence of good faith or a reasonable belief that the act was inapplicable.
In Camp Hill Lumber Co., Inc. v. Wirtz, 17 WH cases 284, the Fifth Circuit reiterated its earlier holding that the constitutional right to trial by jury does not extend to injunctive suits to restrain the withholding of back wages under the act.
Regarding coverage under the Fair Labor Standards Act, two appellate courts reiterated the principle that when an employee is engaged in interstate activities on a regular and recurring basis his employment is subject to the act even though the production of goods for interstate commerce represents a very small part of the employer's business (Dickenson v. U.S., 353 F. 2d 389; cert. den. 86 S. Ct. 1345) or the time spent in interstate activities represents a small portion of the employee's total working time (Wirtz v. First State Abstract and Insurance Co., 17 WH cases 358).
In Wirtz v. Atlantic States Construction Co., 357 F. 2d 442, the Fifth Circuit held that the FLSA was applicable to the construction of a new port facility at Georgetown, S.C. It also held that the Department's regional attorneys could be delegated authority to institute enforcement actions on behalf of the Secretary.
In regard to “enterprise coverage” under the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Fifth Circuit held in Wirtz v. Savannah Bank and Trust Co., 17 WH cases 374, that a bank's operation of an office building, which included various tenants in addition to the bank, and the bank's banking and trust operations are “related activities" performed “for a common business purpose" within the meaning of the “enterprise coverage" provisions of the act; it also held that maintenance employees servicing only the premises occupied by the building's tenants are entitled to the benefits of the act under section 3(s)(3).
Two other “enterprise” cases involving building maintenance employees were before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth and Tenth Circuits during the fiscal year.
In Wirtz v. Columbian Mutual Life Insurance Company, 246 F. Supp.
198, the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Tennessee ruled against the Secretary's position as did the Western District of Oklahoma in Wirtz v. First National Bank & Trust Co., 239 F. Supp.
In a significant decision under the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia held that a "purchase notice agreement" under which large procurements were made from a bakery by a military supply agency is a contract covered by the act even though no single order exceeded $10,000 (United Biscuit Co. of America v. Wirtz, 359 F. 2d 206; cert. den. 86 S. Ct. 1861).
The work of the Litigation Division in this field involves several workmen's compensation statutes administered by the Bureau of Employees' Compensation.
These statutes provide benefits to employees or their families in the event of injury or death while in the performance of duty.
Approximately 3½ million workers are subject to these laws; of these, 2½ million work for the Federal Government and are covered by the Federal Employees' Compensation Act or its extensions, while 1 million are employees in private enterprise covered by the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act or its extensions.
In litigation under the Longshoremen's Act and its extensions, which relate to nongovernment employees, the Division actively participates with the Department of Justice in the defense of administrative adjudications of the Bureau's Deputy Commissioners in the courts.
Seventy-five such cases were commenced during fiscal 1966.
The Division prepared 56 briefs, of which 51 were in the U.S. district courts and 5 in the U.S. courts of appeals.
In addition, the Division presented arguments in 14 cases in the district courts and in 3 cases in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
Forty-nine decisions were handed down, 36 from the district courts and 7 from the courts of appeals.
Compensation orders of the Deputy Commissioners were sustained in 43 of these cases; 2 were remanded for further administrative consideration; and 4 were rejected.
In addition, three orders of the Deputy Commissioners were upheld by the Supreme Court through denial of petitions for certiorari in two instances and by a grant of a rehearing in the other followed by a favorable opinion.
In the latter instance, the Court utilized a rare form of procedure; that is, acting upon a rehearing application more than 3 years after the Court had denied certiorari and a previous rehearing application (Gondeck v. Pan American World Airways, Inc., 382 U.S. 25).
In addition to litigation matters, the Division also defends the Bureau's administrative actions before the Federal Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, which hears appeals from adverse decisions of the Bureau, In fiscal 1966, 314 such appeals were defended.
Another function of the Division is supervision of the prosecution of private damage claims against persons responsible for injury to Government employees, in order to benefit the Federal employee or his survivors, as well as to secure maximum reimbursement to the Government, from the proceeds of recoveries, for compensation benefits paid by the Government under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
Gross recoveries on such claims during fiscal 1966 totaled $5,526,306.48.
After deducting expenses of recovery, a net of $3,979,467.60 remained available for offset against compensation paid or payable by the United States to its employees or their dependents.
Both of these figures set new records.
From the net recoveries, reimbursement of $1,096,875.93 was made to the Government, and $133,347.99 was allowed as credit for medical bills paid.
Thus, the total immediate benefit to the United States was $1,230,223.92.
The remainder of the net recovery became available for credit against future liabilities upon the same claims.
The Bureau of Employees' Compensation estimates conservatively that the total actual benefit to the Government from third-party recoveries from reimbursement and credit against future liability amounts to from $2.6 million to $3.0 million annually.
The Division also furnishes legal services to the Bureau of Labor Standards with respect to its enforcement of the maritime safety program under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
In fiscal year 1966, 10 cases charging violations were brought before hearing examiners.
Cease and desist orders were issued in six cases.
Through the Office of the Special Assistant to the Solicitor for Civil Rights, the Office of the Solicitor provided legal services in connection with the civil rights responsibilities of the Department.
These legal services were provided principally to the Manpower Administration and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance.
In the case of the former, these services related to activities under the provisions of the Civil Rights Act prohibiting discrimination in programs financially assisted by the Department, and under the Department's nondiscrimination-in-apprenticeship program.
Assistance was given in connection with the Manpower Administrator's investigation of programs of the Bureau of Employment Security, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, and Neighborhood Youth Corps.
Legal counsel was provided for conciliation conferences held with the administrators of employment security agencies of 15 States, where violations of title VI were indicated.
Legal opinions were provided concerning the interpretation ad application of pertinent laws, regulations, and orders.
The Office assisted the Department of Justice in representing the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in a law suit brought to prevent the New Jersey Civil Rights Division from processing discrimination charges against an apprenticeship program registered by the Bureau.
The court sustained the Department's position that actions by the Federal Government did not preclude the proceedings under the State's fair employment practices legislation.
Counsel was also supplied to officials of the Bureau who were subpenaed to testify in the State administrative proceeding.
The Office also provided a variety of legal services for the Department's Office of Federal Contract Compliance (which has succeeded to the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity) in its performance of its responsibility under Executive Order 11246 to prevent job discrimination on Government contracts.
Among other services were the provision of legal counsel in connection with more than 30 informal hearings concerning the employment practices of Government contractors, and the preparation of legal opinions and of Director's orders to contracting agencies.
New regulations were being drafted to replace those of the President's Committee.
The office participated with the Department of Justice in the preparation and presentation of the Government's case in United States v. Building and Construction Trades Council of St. Louis, et al., involving charges of racial discrimination in connection with the federally financed St. Louis Gateway Arch project.
The complaint charged that certain building trades had discriminated in violation of title VII of the Civil Rights Act and had tortiously interfered with the Government contractor's efforts to comply with his obligations under Executive Order 11246.
The Office also assisted in the joint efforts of several Federal agencies to obtain compliance by the largest shipbuilding company in the country with the equal employment opportunity requirements of the Executive order and of the Civil Rights Act.
During negotiations, an order was prepared and issued directing Federal agencies not to enter into contracts with the company without a finding, made by the contracting agency and approved by the Secretary of Labor, that the company was able to comply with the equal opportunity clause required by the Executive order.
Shortly thereafter, the company entered into a satisfactory conciliation agreement.
The Office also provided legal assistance in connection with the Department's program of equal employment opportunities for its own employees.
The Division of Labor-Management Laws supervises and coordinates the Department's litigation functions under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act and Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act.
It gives legal advice and services required for the interpretation and administration of these statutes to the Office of Labor-Management and Welfare-Pension Reports in the Labor-Management Services Administration.
The Division reviewed 324 cases involving the LMRDA for possible civil or criminal litigation during the fiscal 1966.
There were 50 civil actions involving the Department instituted in the Federal district courts, and 91 cases transmitted to the Department of Justice for criminal prosecution.
The Division also reviewed four cases involving the WPPDA to determine whether enforcement action was necessary.
The 50 civil actions included 35 involving title IV on the conduct of labor organization elections, 1 seeking to compel the termination of a trusteeship and the filing of the reports required by title III, 5 (4 of which were successfully concluded during fiscal 1966) brought to enforce administrative subpenas, and 4 filed to compel the filing of reports under title II.
In addition, five civil actions were instituted to compel the Secretary to institute court actions under title IV of the act.
Several important court decisions were handed down interpreting the provisions of title IV.
In Wirtz v. Local 153, Glass Bottle Blowers Association, U.S.D.C., W.D. Pa., 244 F. Supp.
745 (1965), the court held that the defendant violated section 401(e) of the act by requiring that members, to be eligible as candidates, must have attended at least 75 percent of the monthly meetings for 2 years preceding the election.
The court dismissed the suit, however, holding that the imposition of such eligibility requirement may not have affected the election outcome.
This decision has been appealed to the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.
The validity of the Glass Bottle Blowers Association's meeting-attendance requirement is also at issue in five other cases.
Two other courts dismissed suits seeking to set aside elections of union officers on the ground that the violations alleged may not have affected the outcome of the election.
Appeals have been taken to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Wirtz v. Local Unions 410, 410A, 410B, and 410C, Operating Engineers, and Wirtz v. Local 30, Operating Engineers, seeking reversal of the district courts' orders dismissing the complaints.
Also involved in these appeals is the question of whether the conduct of a regular election renders moot a pending title IV suit.
Several district courts have held that such election does not render a pending title IV action moot.
This issue is present in most title IV suits because of the length of time it takes to get a case to trial and because of the frequency with which local unions conduct elections of officers.
In Wirtz v. Local 559, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, U.S.D.C., W.D. Kentucky, 61 LRRM 2618, 53 L.C. 11,044 (1966), Judge Shelbourne held that the wrongful exclusion or disqualification of a candidate is ipso facto sufficient ground for setting aside an election of union officers.
In two cases, Wirtz v. Local Union 169, International Hod Carriers, U.S.D.C., Nevada, 246 F. Supp.
741 (1965), and Wirtz v. Local 125, International Hod Carriers, U.S.D.C., N.D. Ohio, 62 LRRM 2141, 53 L.C. 11,213 (1966), the courts held that to prove effect on outcome, in cases involving denial of the right to vote, it must be shown that a sufficient number of members were denied the right to vote to raise the mathematical possibility that the outcome would have been different had they been permitted to vote.
The question of whether the Secretary may include in his title IV suit alleged violations which were not processed through the internal union appeal procedures was involved in several cases.
The court in Wirtz v. Local Union 169, International Hod Carriers, supra, held that the Secretary may investigate all aspects of a contested election and may base a complaint on every issue which the union had a fair opportunity to consider and resolve at the instance of any member's internal complaint.
However, where the matters alleged in the Secretary's complaint have not been processed through the internal union appeal procedures, the Secretary's action has been dismissed: Wirtz v. Local Unions Nos. 406.
406B, and 406C, Operating Engineers, U.S.D.C., E.D. La., 254 F. Supp.
The question of the scope of the Secretary's authority under section 402(b) is pending before three courts of appeals: Wirtz v. Local Unions Nos. 9.
9A and 9B, Operating Engineers, U.S.C.A., 10 Cir.
Nos. 8226 and 8227; Wirtz v. Local Unions Nos. 406, 406A, 406B and 406C, Operating Engineers, U.S.C.A., 5 Cir.
No. 23982; and Wirtz v. Local 125, International Hod Carriers, U.S.C.A., 6 Cir.
No. 17,344.
In two cases, the court held that union members have absolutely no right or standing to intervene in an action brought by the Secretary: Wirtz v. Local 825, Operating Engineers, U.S.D.C., New Jersey, 60 LRRM 2092, 52 L.C. 16,636 (1965); Wirtz v. Local 611, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, U.S.D.C., N.M., 61 LRRM 2423 (1966).
And in Katrinic v. Wirtz, U.S.D.C., D.C., 62 LRRM 2557, 53 L.C. 11,289 (1966), the court dismissed the suit brought to compel the filing of a title IV action holding that the Secretary was given discretionary authority to determine whether to file suit and that where such discretion had been exercised the court lacked the power to vacate such decisions.
In Wirtz v. Teamsters Industrial and Allied Employees Union, Local 73, U.S.D.C., N.D., Ohio, 62 LRRM 2522, 53 L.C. 11,288 (1966), the court held that, if illegal acts are committed prior to the installation of elected officers which prevent the persons so elected from assuming the offices to which they were properly entitled, such acts do affect the outcome of the election and may be remedied under title IV.
In seeking relief in such cases, the Secretary may petition the court either to install the winning candidates or to direct the conduct of a new election.
Of the four reporting cases, two were significant.
Douglas v. Wirtz, 353 F. 2d 30 (4th Cir., 1965), cert.
383 U.S. 909 (1966), was a declaratory judgment action by the plaintiff to determine his obligation under reporting requirements of LMRDA.
The court held that he must.
Following the Fourth Circuit's decision an order was entered in the companion case of Wirtz v. Douglas, U.S.D.C., M.D., N.C., Civil Action No.
C-184–G–63 (1966), directing the defendant to file the required reports with the Secretary.
This same issue is pending before the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in Price v. Wirtz, U.S.C.A., 5 Cir.
No. 22,630.
The district court had upheld the position of the Department in granting the Secretary's motion for summary judgment.
No. 22,350.
Wirtz v. National Welders Supply Co., U.S.D.C., W.D., N.C., 254 F. Supp.
62 (1966), was an action to compel defendant to file a corrected employer report.
The court dismissed the action, holding that the Secretary cannot rely exclusively on a NLRB decision to establish “object.
Finding that the issue of motive and purpose was not before the NLRB, the court also held that collateral estoppel does not apply.
This decision has been appealed to the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
Sixty-seven individuals were indicted under the criminal provisions of the LMRDA during fiscal 1966.
During the same period, 62 cases resulted in convictions, 2 resulted in acquittals, and 6 were dismissed.
In United States v. Brill, 350 F. 2d 171 (C.A. 2, 1965), the Second Circuit affirmed the judgments of conviction which had been returned against four union officials for conspiring to violate section 501(c).
And the First Circuit, in Colella v. United States, 360 F. 2d 792 (C.A. 1, 1966), affirmed the judgment of conviction wherein Colella was found guilty of violating section 501(c) by falsifying vouchers for hotel expenses and car rentals.
In United States v. Marroso,,U.S.D.C., E.D. Mich., 205 F. Supp.
27 (1966), wherein the defendant was charged with receiving a kickback for influencing action by the Central States, Southeast, and Southwest Areas Pension Fund, the district court granted defendant's motion for acquittal, holding that the evidence was insufficient to support a conclusion that the defendant was acting as an agent of the pension fund in soliciting the loan application.
The Division gave extensive legal assistance to LMWP in preparing regulations, reporting forms, and various technical assistance aids and other publications.
The Division rendered approximately 3,746 written opinions under the LMRDA and approximately 2,904 under the WPPDA.
The Manpower Administration oversees and directs the major Federal manpower responsibilities assigned to the Department of Labor by legislation or the Secretary of Labor's directives.
Four departmental agencies engaged directly in employment, training, or advancing the welfare of the U.S. labor force administer and operate these programs and activities, coordinating their work where necessary with other Federal agencies.
The agencies are the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, the Bureau of Employment Security, the Office of Manpower Policy, Evaluation, and Research, and the Neighborhood Youth Corps.
Programs and activities enabled by 14 legislative acts of Congress, three Executive orders, and departmental regulations were expanded in fiscal year 1966 to channel, develop, and properly utilize the human resources available in the Nation at a time when a general shortage of skilled and semiskilled workers presented a major manpower problem.
The main efforts of the Manpower Administration were directed towards the training and employment of the unemployed and underemployed during the year, with emphasis on the disadvantaged, hard-core unemployed individuals who needed special preparation and assistance.
Some training goals were exceeded as the operating agencies streamlined their functions and improved their impact on labor force preparation and utilization.
More than 314,000 training opportunities were scheduled during the fiscal year, an increase of nearly 49,000 over the previous period.
It is significant that while the labor force in July 1966 showed an increase of more than 1.6 million over that month a year ago, the number of unemployed was 377,000 less.
Some of this improvement may be attributed to the training efforts developed under the Manpower Development and Training Act.
The goal of 90,000 on-the-job trainees for the year was exceeded by more than 23,000 for a total of 113,098.
More than 148,000 trainees were scheduled for vocational school training, and another 52,000 were approved for special programs of experiment and demonstration.
The total number of apprentices registered with the Manpower Administration or through State agencies was more than 185,000, the highest since 1957 and 14,000 more than in the previous 12 months.
It was also the fourth successive year that apprentice numbers increased since the 1961 recession low of 156,000.
More than one-half million youths between the ages of 16 and 21 without previous work experience and from disadvantaged backgrounds had job opportunities provided through the Neighborhood Youth Corps.
Two-thirds of the projects were for inschool enrollees who were considered potential dropouts.
Almost 75,000 former enrollees had obtained career employment by the end of the fiscal year.
For the first time since the Labor Department began classifying labor supply adequacy in 150 major production and employment centers, 59 were classified as having unemployment of less than 2 percent, the largest number in the tight labor-demand-supply category.
Occupational shortages were widespread in the major employment centers, with demand high for qualified professional, technical, and highly skilled workers.
Labor shortages were also reported in many areas in the number of semiskilled and unskilled occupations.
Reflecting the Nation's strong economic position and higher employment rate, unemployment insurance benefit payments decreased 17.5 percent from the previous year's level, to $1.9 billion.
At yearend, State reserves in the unemployment trust fund totaled $9 billion, compared with $7.6 billion on June 30, 1965.
Pilot human resources development programs, involving a case-by-case, personto-person approach to the unemployed and underemployed, were undertaken in five cities of relatively high unemployment: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Rochester, and St. Louis.
Services introduced into these selected areas to increase the employability of individuals included vocational counseling, referral to jobs, to basic educational and occupational training, physical examination, including necessary corrective and health care; psychological service, and legal service.
New research-support programs were authorized by the 1965 amendments to the Manpower Development and Training Act.
Grants up to $10,000 were awarded to 34 doctoral candidates writing in the manpower field and 30 established scholars in the social and behavioral sciences.
A total of $515,000 was awarded to seven colleges and universities to develop their manpower research capability.
Thirty-one new contract research projects were initiated to probe such subjects as the occupational needs of migratory farmworkers, employment problems of youth, Negro participation in apprenticeship programs, redesign of jobs to utilize the skills of older workers, and occupational adjustment of recent lowincome southern migrants to a northern city.
Evaluation studies were expanded during the year to include other manpower programs as well as MDTA.
A study of the Youth Opportunity Center program revealed a need for additional innovative techniques, although the YOC's are generally successful in reaching disadvantaged youth.
MDTA studies concluded that seven out of eight trainees received full-time employment within a few months after completing training; on-the-job training projects give some of the best returns on investment; the present training allowance program is basically sound; and extension of the MDTA programs into the 1970's is warranted.
The Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, as amended.
The Neighborhood Youth Corps provisions of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 (title 1B).
Training provisions of the Area Redevelopment Act of 1961.
The employment security system of job placement and unemployment insurance under the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933 and the Social Security Act of 1935.
The equal opportunity and nondiscrimination provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and enforcement under Executive Order 10925, as amended by Executive Order 11114, in Department of Labor contracts and programs.
Promotion and development of apprenticeship and training under the National Apprenticeship Act of 1937.
Trade adjustment assistance provisions of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
The Public Works Acceleration Act of 1962.
The Full Employment Act of 1946.
Title IV of the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944.
Civil defense and emergency planning functions for manpower utilization.
The skilled worker provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, as amended.
All programs are moving ahead to help meet the national goal of full employment.
In the following pages, more detailed reports summarize the activities of the four agencies during fiscal year 1966.
Promotes and helps develop and improve programs of apprenticeship and other on-the-job training in all apprenticeable trades and occupations.
Promotes, develops, administers, and services on-the-job training programs in subprofessional occupations under the Manpower Development and Training Act in cooperation with management, labor, and State and community agencies.
Promotes quality standards of all on-the-job training in U.S. business and industry.
Promotes equality of opportunity in all industry training with selection procedures for trainees on the basis of trainee qualifications alone.
Provides technical assistance, training aids, and materials to industry when and where required.
Reviews apprenticeship programs as developed by industry for adherence to minimum Federal standards recommended by the Federal Committee on Apprenticeship.
Registers apprenticeship programs as a recognition by the Federal Government that they meet minimum standards of training.
Administers the allocation of Manpower Development and Training Act funds to employers and agencies sponsoring on-the-job training.
Administers a program of industrial training for foreign nationals in the United States.
Promotes apprenticeship as a youth opportunity for those with the necessary qualifications through apprenticeship information centers and schools.
The Bureau operates with a staff of about 600 in 11 regional and 160 field offices throughout the Ünited States.
Apprenticeship programs are the responsibility of industry.
Local management and labor cooperate when workers are organized; management develops and directs the program alone when its labor force does not have organized representation.
Labor-management apprenticeship committees oversee training in approximately 370 apprenticeable occupations.
There was a dramatic increase of more than 14,000 registered apprentices in the United States by the end of fiscal year 1966.
The total of registered apprentices at midyear was more than 185,000, the highest since 1958.
Building and construction and the metalworking trades accounted for nearly half of the increase, pointing up the continuing high level of activity in construction and manufacturing.
This was the fourth successive year that apprentice numbers increased since the 1961 recession low of 156,000.
The rise in 1962 was 3,000; in 1963, 4,000; and in 1964, 8,000, bringing the total registered at that time to 171,000.
More than 68,000 new apprentices were registered, an increase of 8,000 over the previous year.
About 30,000 left apprenticeship for a variety of reasons during the same period.
More than 25,000 apprentices completed training and earned certificates as journeymen in their trades.
Construction trades apprentices rose from 110,000 to 115,000.
Forty-one thousand new registrations were reported—2,500 more than in the previous period.
Metalworking trades apprentices increased from 28,000 to 34,000.
Fourteen thousand new registrations were reported—an increase of almost 3,500.
Significant rises occurred among tool and diemakers and machinists.
Printing trades apprentices increased from 11,500 to 11,700.
Two thousand five hundred new registrations were reported—an increase of about 100.
Apprentices in a wide variety of trades other than those specified (miscellaneous) increased from 21,500 to 23,000.
Ten thousand four hundred new registrations were reported.
Significant rises occurred among maintenance mechanics, repairmen, and millwrights.
During the fiscal year, 1,440 new apprenticeship programs were registered in States for which the Bureau serves as registration agency, while 697 previously registered programs were revised to meet the provisions of equal opportunity in apprenticeship and training.
National and local apprenticeship standards examined totaled 4,572 including BAT and State apprenticeship council (SAC) States.
Twelve hundred reviews were written, while 2,117 programs were registered and/or revised.
Certificates of completion issued to apprentices during the year totaled 6,199; meritorious certificates issued to individuals making major contributions to apprenticeship totaled 9; and 1,944 certificates of registration were issued to individual companies and areawide trade programs.
Four new policy statements were reviewed and approved: For the National Automobile Dealers Association and Automotive Trade Association Managers; Automotive Service Industry Association; Independent Cash Register Dealers Association; and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Enginemen and Firemen.
Five revised national apprenticeship standards were reviewed and approved for the steamfitters-pipefitters; bricklayers; glaziers-glassworkers; metal polisherbuffer and electroplaters; and the National Tool, Die, and Precision Machining Association.
Recommendations were prepared on selection procedures submitted by the United Automobile, Aerospace, and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; National Tool, Die, and Precision Machining Association; National Cash Register Association; national apprenticeship standards for boilermakers; and revised procedures for the electrical contracting industry.
The establishment of regulations in the selection procedures for apprenticeship by the Secretary of Labor in 1964 and the introduction of apprenticeship information centers the same year have made a slow but marked difference in attitude and acceptance of minority groups in apprenticeship.
While exact figures are unavailable, because of local, State, and Federal laws and policies concerning racial data in personnel records, all indications are that the discriminatory barriers on the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin are falling, however slowly.
The 31 States and jurisdictions with apprenticeship councils have adopted plans conforming to the Secretary's regulations on equal employment opportunity through extensive conferences and review by the Bureau.
The recruitment activities, counseling, and placement services of the 19 apprenticeship information centers in 13 States and the District of Columbia have resulted in greater awareness and participation by the minority groups in apprenticeship opportunities.
As an example, nearly 60 percent of the placements in apprenticeship programs by the Washington, D.C., Apprenticeship Information Center have been nonwhite during the center's 3 years of existence.
Racial data is not available from the other information centers, but they have been successful in attracting and informing thousands of apprenticeship prospects.
Ten of the 19 information centers were opened during the fiscal year in Birmingham, Camden, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Minneapolis, Nashville, Norfolk, Paterson, St. Louis, and St. Paul.
The Labor Department is planning to open at least five additional apprenticeship information centers before the end of calendar year 1966.
The Department of Labor has designated 10 general apprenticeable trades on the list of currently critical occupations.
An apprentice in one of these occupations who has served satisfactorily at least 1,000 hours of training may be deferred from service in the Armed Forces at the discretion of Selective Service.
These occupations include aircraft and engine mechanic, die setter (forging), electronics mechanics, glass blower (laboratory apparatus), instrument repairman, jig and template maker, machinist (general definition), orthopedic appliance and limb technician, patternmaker (general definition), and tool and die maker (general definition).
This list has remained unchanged since 1962.
The Labor Department is considering petitions from 14 industry groups that seek to be included on the list of critical occupations.
Petitions analyzed were from the American Iron & Steel Institute; Air Transport Association; Consolidated Milk Producers of Tulare County, Calif.
National Machine Tool Builders Association; American Association of Foot Specialists; American Optometric Association; American Pharmaceutical Association; Forging Industry Association; Gray & Ductile Iron Founders' Society; International Chiropractors Association; Malleable Founders' Society; National Association of Dental Laboratories; Non-Ferrous Founders' Society; National Pretzel Bakers Institute; and Steel Founders' Society of America.
With the addition of 20 occupations to the list of apprenticeable trades in the past 12 years, the Manpower Administration promoted the wider application of the apprenticeship system in fiscal 1966 to more occupations which require broad training for versatile and skilled workers.
The growing aerospace activity is one of the broad industrial groups where this effort is being made.
This includes the skills needed for electronics, thermonuclear applications in industry, the use of exotic metals and alloys, and sophisticated telemetry and computerized production systems.
As a valuable adjunct in the promotion of apprenticeship, the Labor Department has assisted in the establishment of hundreds of new programs under the provisions of the Manpower Development and Training Act.
In 1965 alone, more than 11,000 persons were scheduled for on-the-job training programs which were set up as apprentice-entry programs.
These on-the-job training projects have embraced most building and construction trades, a variety of machining and toolmaker trades, photoengraving and camera work, and other occupations such as bakers, cooks and chefs, millwrights, and fabricating trades in metalwork.
The rate of approvals in apprentice-entry occupations under MDTA in calendar year 1966 has increased; at least 15 percent of on-the-job trainees are expected to be in this category by the end of the year.
Although the majority of the trainees are drawn from the unemployed, about 7 percent of the trainees in apprentice-entry categories are persons whose basic skills are being upgraded for eventual acceptance as qualified journeymen.
On-the-job trainees scheduled under the Manpower Development and Training Act increased from 41,800 to 113,100 in fiscal year 1966.
Total training costs totaled $54.5 million.
The Labor Department negotiated 2,430 contracts with employers, unions, employer associations, joint apprenticeship committees, and city, State, and local governments.
On-the-job training was provided through employers for unemployed persons in more than 4,880 projects comprising over 700 occupations, including shoe repair, steelmaking, woodworking, furniture industry, subprofessional hospital occupations, television service and repair, fishing, cooks and chefs, routeman (sales), automobile mechanic, bakers, meatcutters, waitresses, hearing aid technicians, and drycleaning occupations.
Within provisions of the Manpower Development and Training Act, eight State apprenticeship agencies were actively engaged in the development and servicing of on-the-job training programs.
Budgets totaling slightly less than $1 million were reviewed and approved to reimburse administration costs in California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Louisiana, New York, Wisconsin, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia.
These State apprenticeship agencies developed on-the-job training contracts to provide training opportunities for 18,850 skill-deficient workers.
At the close of the year, two additional States, Florida and Massachusetts, had entered into agreements with the Department for the performance of such service in fiscal year 1967.
Twenty-six national MDTA-OJT contracts were developed which will provide training opportunities for more than 28,000 on-the-job trainees.
More than 9,000 of these job opportunities are in apprenticeable occupations.
Three of the contracts are with international unions: The International Association of Machinists & Aerospace Workers, AFL-CIO; the International Union of Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers, AFL-CIO; and the Journeymen Barbers, Hairdressers, Cosmetologists and Proprietors' International Union of America.
Twelve of the contracts are with national associations and the remainder are with national companies.
The principal programing activity of the Division of International Activities provided, planned, and developed 48 program projects for 72 primary participants.
These programs were sponsored by the Agency for International Development, United Nations, International Labor Organization, and the Department of State's Bureau of Education and Cultural Affairs.
The programing activity covered 56 different industrial fields of study.
In addition, the Division of International Activities programed a total of 211 secondary participants from 40 countries as well as 44 special orientation programs for officials from 27 countries.
To support the ongoing manpower programs of the Labor Department the Bureau produced two definitive booklets aimed at assisting industry to train workers.
The first was "Setting Up an Apprenticeship Program," a detailed description of methods and means for establishing a formal on-the-job training program with related classroom instruction.
The other booklet is called "How to Train Workers on the Job," to serve as a guide to persons selected as instructors.
Scheduled was a leaflet, “Need a Job?
The Bureau of Employment Security and State employment security agencies comprise the Federal-State employment security system.
That system encompasses employment and related services for workers and employers and unemployment insurance services.
1. Providing a effective employment service to help individuals find employment utilizing their highest capacities and skills.
2. Referring capable employees to employers and providing appropriate employment-related personnel services.
3. Helping workers develop their capacities and skills; working with educational and training authorities for manpower development, training, and utilization; and working with community groups for area economic development and stabilization.
4. Providing an income-maintenance program, soundly financed, to replace a worker's wage loss resulting from involuntary unemployment; and, by maintaining purchasing power, contributing to the Nation's economic growth.
5. Providing to labor, management, government, and the public the employment, unemployment, and other information related to the operation of the employment security system.
6. Insuring that domestic farmworkers are given preference in employment and that use of any supplementary foreign workers does not affect adversely the wages and living and working conditions of domestic workers similarly employed.
7. Assisting in development and utilization of civilian manpower capability for meeting national emergencies and disaster needs.
8. Assisting other countries to improve methods for achieving employment security objectives.
In addition to these joint Federal-State responsibilities, the Bureau has certain overall responsibilities which include: (1) Review of State agency administrative operations; justification of appropriation requests; and audit of expenditures; (2) analysis of State agency statistical reports on the operation of their programs; (3) administration of Federal unemployment compensation programs covering separated employees of the Federal Government and ex-servicemen; (4) operation of a system of interarea recruitment of labor among the States; and (5) maintenance of a public employment service in the District of Columbia.
Administrative costs for operation of the employment security programs are met from congressional appropriations (with basic program funds from taxes paid by employers under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act), with 100 percent grants being apportioned by the Secretary of Labor to cooperating State agencies.
The Bureau carries out its program responsibilities through three services— U.S. Employment Service (which includes a Veterans Employment Service), Office of Farm Labor Service, and Unemployment Insurance Service.
The Federal-State employment service system consists of the Bureau's U.S. Employment Service (USES) and affiliated State employment services with their network of more than 2,000 local offices.
During the year, these local offices accounted for more than 10.8 million placements, 4.3 million of which were in agriculture.
More than 10.6 million jobseekers registered for work at these offices.
In October 1965, the Secretary of Labor named a 15-member task force, representing management, labor, educators, and the public, to review operations and make recommendations for improving the public employment service.
Dr. George Shultz, dean of the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, headed the group.
In the report submitted to the Secretary on December 29, 1965, the task force stressed the need for a "comprehensive manpower services center" rather than a simple labor exchange.
Among other recommendations were: Complete separation of employment service and unemployment insurance functions, including financing; upgrading of employment service personnel through training and higher salaries; improvement of interarea recruitment procedures through use of multimarket centers, automatic data processing, and computer technology; development and dissemination of more current and comprehensive job market information; integration of service with that of other private and public manpower agencies and programs; and appointment of a separate advisory and review committee.
The report became the basis for planning administrative action within existing legislative authority to implement task force recommendations.
It was also the basis for the bill proposed by Senator Joseph S. Clark (Pa.) to amend the Wagner-Peyser Act—S.
2974, Manpower Services Act of 1966.
The bill was being considered by the Congress at the end of the fiscal year.
Human resources program.
The first pilot human resources program to be funded under the Manpower Development and Training Act was undertaken in Chicago on December 10, 1965.
It was followed by programs in Houston, Los Angeles, Rochester, and St. Louis.
The idea for reaching the hard-core unemployed through a case-by-case, person-to-person approach was suggested by the Secretary of Labor as a means of determining the actual extent of unemployment.
Each individual in the selected target area of high unemployment is queried as to his employment status and history, income, level of education, race, sex, and age.
Project services to increase employability include vocational counseling; referral to jobs, to other agencies for needed service, or to basic educational and occupational training; physical examination, including necessary corrective and health care; psychological service; and legal service.
Sponsoring the Chicago program are the Illinois State Employment Service, Cook County Department of Public Aid, and Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity.
Other public and private agencies cooperate.
By the end of the fiscal year, 12,709 questionnaires had been completed and 4,119 individuals had been referred to special units of the Illinois State Employment Service established at urban progress centers.
Manpower shortages.
Beginning in January 1966, the Bureau of Employment Security and the Bureau of Labor Statistics prepared jointly a “Monthly Report on Skill Shortages" to inform the Secretary of Labor, other Government officials, and the public of manpower problems, including labor stringencies resulting from the Vietnam conflict and the Nation's continued economic expansion, and program actions.
The two bureaus also planned experimental surveys of employer job vacancies, which were carried out by State employment security agencies in 15 areas during April 1966.
Data being analyzed at end of fiscal year covered, among other information, occupational vacancies existing 1 month or longer, and wage rates.
Information on the previous year's experiments, released in fiscal year 1966, showed that a high rate of employer cooperation could be expected in collection of job vacancy information.
The Bureau encouraged State agencies to explore with employers the possibility of adjusting rigid hiring specifications in order to recruit needed workers, of stepping up training programs for workers in shortage occupations, of increasing on-the-job training and institutional training under the Manpower Development and Training Act, and of upgrading and restructuring jobs to permit greater use of entry workers.
To obtain more comprehensive information on unfilled job openings by occupation, area, and duration, quarterly reporting was initiated in some 80 areas.
Work continued on the planned revision of the labor area reporting programto provide detailed information on occupational shortages and surpluses on a quarterly basis for some 75 occupations in 150 major labor areas.
Labor mobility.
More than 700 workers were relocated in the 11 projects which made up the first round of the labor mobility demonstration program carried out by State employment security agencies in cooperation with the Bureau.
Most of the projects began in April 1965 and ended 6 months later.
They were financed under the Manpower Development and Training Act to study problems arising in the relocation of unemployed and underemployed workers who could not find permanent full-time employment in their home area.
The projects reflected a variety of situations and varied research control situations.
While 76 percent of relocations in the first series were successful, experience indicated need for social services in addition to referral of a worker to a job and payment of his relocation expenses.
In the 13 mobility projects making up the second round, 581 workers were relocated by June 30, 1966, with most of the projects still in operation.
Immigration.
Principal changes under the Immigration and Nationality Act amendments which became effective December 1, 1965, are removal of the national origins quota system and placement of responsibility on the Secretary of Labor to certify—before an immigrant worker may receive a visa—that there are insufficient workers available for the employment and that there will be no adverse effect upon wages and working conditions of similarly employed U.S. workers.
From December 1 through the end of the fiscal year, the Bureau received from State employment security agencies employer requests for 28,402 permanent job openings and issued certifications for 23,620.
Twenty-seven percent of job openings processed under the amendments were for professional, technical, and managerial occupations; 31 percent, skilled and semiskilled; 37 percent, service, mainly live-in domestic work; and the remainder, unskilled, clerical, and sales work.
The Bureau, in June, delegated authority for decisionmaking in all job-offer cases to its regional administrators and made other procedural modifications to permit most decisions to be made within 3 weeks.
The Bureau is required under regulations issued by the Department of Justice to advise the Immigration Service about U.S. employer requests for temporary foreign labor.
In such cases, the Bureau makes a determination of the availability of U.S. labor and the appropriateness of wages and working conditions.
During fiscal 1966, the Bureau processed requests for 5,732 temporary nonfarm job openings and approved 5,421.
Developmental effort during the year in the pilot project LINCS (Labor Inventory Communications System) was concentrated in further refinement of the computer phase—using computers for initial screening of worker qualifications against job requirements.
Three cities—Sacramento, San Francisco, and Los Angeles—were involved in testing the effectiveness of the computer under high-volume operating conditions.
While service was limited to professional, scientific, and managerial occupations, research was started to determine individual job requirements and worker qualifications essential to effective placement of large numbers of workers in skilled and semiskilled occupations.
For fiscal year 1966, nonfarm placements totaled 6,586,800—up 4.1 percent from the preceding year.
The largest increase among occupational groups between fiscal 1965 and 1966 was in the unskilled group—up 11.6 percent.
Some States during the year reported a lack of qualified skilled applicants and applicants for domestic work.
Among industry divisions, placements in durable manufactures reflected the largest gain from 1965—22.8 percent.
This increase was concentrated in automobile and related hard goods.
Counseling and testing.
During fiscal year 1966, local employment service offices, including 148 Youth Opportunity Centers, reported 2,285,000 job counseling interviews and 1,280,000 persons counseled.
Almost 2.6 million tests were given, including the General Aptitude Test Battery for assessment of potential abilities, proficiency tests as an aid in placement, and specific aptitude tests for referral selection purposes.
A nonverbal test of learning ability and achievement was developed for use in determining ability and training potential of disadvantaged persons.
During the year, the Bureau encouraged State agencies to adopt a merit system classification under which all counselors above the trainee level would be hired at the master's degree level.
To improve their competency, counselors from 49 States, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia participated in 3,012 courses of instruction.
More than 2,000 individuals were recruited for Project CAUSE II (counseloradviser university summer education) and were trained at 35 universities and colleges and 3 private agencies.
Of 1,561 completing training, 1,060 were hired by State agencies as counselors, counselor trainees, or “outreach" personnel, i.e., those who seek out the unemployed and disadvantaged who ordinarily do not avail themselves of employment service assistance.
Youth services.
At the end of the fiscal year, 148 Youth Opportunity Centers were operating in 113 areas, with 119 of the centers in quarters separate from those of the local public employment service office.
The centers provide highly personalized services to youth between the ages of 16 and 22.
From early in 1965, when the centers began opening, through June 30, 1966, they registered 1,072,400 youths, counseled 312,900, gave 337,700 aptitude and occupational tests, and placed 235,200 youths in nonagricultural and farm jobs.
The employment service concept of outreach service originated with Youth Opportunity Centers.
To implement the program, 200 community workers were trained in five States during the year to perform outreach services for YOC's.
In the 1966 fiscal year, 7.6 percent of total new applications in the centers resulted from outreach activities.
State employment services in 49 States and the Virgin Islands recruited, screened, and referred 48,400 applicants to the Job Corps in fiscal 1966 for its urban and rural conservation centers.
For fiscal years 1965 and 1966, employment service offices referred 80,200 acceptable candidates against their Job Corps quota of 91,513 applicants.
Applicants referred to the Neighborhood Youth Corps by employment service offices, including Youth Opportunity Centers, numbered 145,000 in fiscal 1966.
Other services provided to NYC applicants and trainees included recruitment, counseling and testing, job development, job placement, referral to further training, and followup service after placement.
To provide initial interviews to young men rejected by Selective Service for military service because of educational deficiencies, employment service counselors were stationed in 72 examining and entrance stations of the Armed Forces.
Since the beginning of the program of service early in 1964 through June 30, 1966, some 161.000 vouth—26.2 percent of all 601,500 mental standard rejectees—were interviewed by employment service representatives.
During fiscal year 1966 alone, 79.800 of these youth received initial interviews at examining stations or at public employment service offices.
Efforts were made in ES offices to develop job opportunities for the youth or to refer them to needed training, basic educational or vocational, or to other agencies for needed services.
In the basic ES program of cooperation with some 10,000 high schools in the 1964–65 school year, 633,210 seniors who planned to enter the labor force were registered; 333,361 also received counseling and 103,000 were placed.
Through formal referral arrangements with the schools, special counseling and placement services were provided to 73,000 dropouts in the school year.
In the second youth opportunity campaign to be sponsored by the Administration for summer jobs and work training for youth under 22 years of age, employers offered 959,000 job openings; 1,147,000 youths applied to employment service offices for jobs; and 555,000 placements were recorded between May 5 and the end of June.
Professional and managerial workers.
Placements of professional and managerial personnel by public employment offices, at 278,300, were up 9.9 percent from fiscal year 1965.
Convention placement service was provided at annual meetings of 22 national professional societies having total membership of 150,000 and to 15 such groups at State and regional conferences.
National employment registries were established in cooperation with the associations concerned for librarians, economists, and anthropologists.
In addition, State agencies maintained 37 registries for referring nurses to emergency and regular duty, and 9 centers were operated specifically for the professional, managerial, and technical work force.
Special placement service was also provided to new college graduates and to teachers in 13 States.
Older workers.
Nonagricultural placements of applicants in the 45-and-over age group totaled 1,310,000 during the year.
Counseling services were provided to 119,600 of this group—7.5 percent of all new applicants to local employment service offices.
Funds were allocated to State agencies for 100 additional positions—67 for older worker service units on a pilot basis in five major cities; the others, for fulltime older worker specialists in 33 States.
Minority groups.
With funds provided for 58 new minority group representative positions, State agencies were able to obtain additional technical assistance and to coordinate program efforts in behalf of minority groups.
Special efforts were made to place Negro college graduates, including Negro teachers displaced by the integration of public schools in some States, in jobs commensurate with their education and training.
Employment service representatives cooperated with Plans for Progress employers in a series of seminars designed to increase job opportunities for minority employees.
In May 1966, the Secretary of Labor announced that racial data would be maintained on employment security records, thus making it possible to evaluate services provided to minority groups.
Handicapped workers.
New applications from handicapped persons, at 463,500, were up slightly from last year, and 64 percent were placed, compared with only 61.6 percent in 1965.
Referrals to the employment service from State vocational rehabilitation agencies totaled 24,300, and placements of those persons numbered 6,700, both record highs.
Placements of disabled veterans rose 4.7 percent over the year to 103,800.
Under the Vocational Rehabilitation Act amendments of 1965 and the Servicemen's Readjustment Act amendments of 1966, the employment service became responsible for providing employment and related services to more handicapped persons.
Veterans.
Special service to veterans was provided in each local office by a veterans employment representative.
In addition, the Bureau's Veterans Employment Service had a State veterans employment representative in each State to assist in providing job counseling and placement services for veterans and in insuring veterans priority in referral to job opportunities and retraining.
In fiscal 1966, veterans filed more than 1,172,500 applications for work at local employment service offices, or 20 percent of all new job applications filed by men, and obtained more than 25 percent of all nonfarm placements for men.
Disabled male veterans, representing 35 percent of the handicapped men who sought jobs through employment service offices, were placed in 44 percent of the jobs filled by handicapped men.
On March 3, 1966, with the President's signing of the Veterans' Readjustment Benefits Act of 1966, 3.6 million ex-servicemen received veterans' status together with entitlement to preferential service through the public employment service.
In cooperation with the Department of Defense, employment briefings were given by employment service representatives to 30,000 career personnel planning to retire from military service and to seek other employment.
Employer services.
In visits of Bureau representatives to multistate firms and national associations and in visits of local office staff to nonfarm employers, efforts were made to determine manpower needs, to promote use of ES services, and to stimulate job development in service and related occupations, with emphasis on utilization of the hard-core unemployed.
Employers were urged to modify hiring requirements to utilize limited skills and potentials of the unemployed, including the disadvantaged and minority group workers.
Interarea recruitment.
Tight job market conditions and new regulations concerning use of alien workers caused many employers to make greater use of interarea recruitment facilities of the employment service.
Job openings listed on the nationwide inventory totaled over 515,000, a rise of nearly 76 percent over the total for fiscal year 1965.
Against these openings, employment service offices referred over 522,000 applicants, of whom 176,000 were employed.
About 75 percent of the interarea placements were made in the 56 largest metropolitan areas.
Training activities.
More than 2,800 institutional training projects for some 160,000 persons were approved under the Manpower Development and Training Act in fiscal 1966.
Allowance and training costs for these projects totaled nearly $309 million.
About 160,000 persons enrolled in institutional training during the year, and some 87,000 completed MDTA courses.
From the inception of the MDTA program through fiscal 1966, 88 percent of the trainees had obtained jobs, most of which were related to their training.
At the last contact in the fiscal year, 75 percent were still employed.
Training efforts were focused increasingly on assisting disadvantaged persons, teenagers, nonwhites, and those with limited education.
Almost half of the enrollees during the year received training in occupations in the skilled and semiskilled categories, nearly a fourth in the clerical and sales field, and more than one-seventh in service activities.
Job market information.
Of the 150 major production and employment centers which the U.S. Employment Service classifies monthly as to adequacy of labor supply, 59 in June 1966 were classified as having low unemployment, the largest number in the tight labor-demand-supply category since the classifications began in 1955.
Only 13 areas were classified in the substantial unemployment category, compared with 21 in June 1965 and 88 in June 1961 when the Nation was begining to emerge from a recession.
Since the passage of the Public Works and Economic Development Act, which replaced the Area Redevelopment Act and the Public Works Acceleration Act, the U.S. Employment Service identifies areas of persistent unemployment which are qualified to be designated as redevelopment areas.
Such areas are eligible for all benefits under the act, including business loans and public works assistance.
The USES also is responsible for certifying areas which have had substantial unemployment in the past calendar year.
Such areas qualify for public works grants under title I of the act but not for other assistance available to redevelopment areas.
At the end of fiscal year 1966, there were 441 labor areas, counties, and cities of 250,000 population classified as areas of persistent unemployment and 143 areas eligible for public works assistance only.
Areas classified by USES as persistent unemployment areas and those experiencing substantial unemployment are also eligible for preference in the award of Federal procurement contracts under Defense Policy No. 4 and the Buy American Act.
Occupational shortages were widespread in the 150 major employment centers surveved each month, with demand high for qualified professional, technical, and highly skilled workers.
Local employment service offices also reported labor stringencies in a number of semiskilled and unskilled occupations.
Despite employment gains nationally, substantial unemployment conditions continued in selected areas.
Emphasis under the Manpower Development and Training Act and in the Neighborhood Youth Corps and other manpower programs was directed particularly toward these pockets of heavy unemployment in 30 major cities.
The following actions among others were taken to help State employment security agencies in supplying meaningful occupational information to State vocational education agencies as required by the Vocational Education Act of 1963: An employment service task force was named to develop the needed job market information: Bureau staff worked with representatives of State employment security agencies and outside consultants to devise improved techniques for obtaining more comprehensive occupational information; and research was undertaken to improve techniques of long-range occupational forecasting.
Community employment program.
Local employment service offices provide information to community groups for use in the initiation and operation of programs to increase job opportunities and achieve employment stabilization.
In fiscal vear 1966, employment service representatives served as consultants to, or as members of, a total of 2,578 community groups.
Manpower information was provided to another 1,210 community groups.
Under the mass layoff reporting procedure involving 100 workers or more, 216 permanent layoffs, representing some 65,600 workers, were reported.
Layoffs of 41,000 workers occurred at plants which discontinued operations.
Layoffs of 42,000 individuals were reported under the ES advance notice program, thus enabling local offices to assist affected workers in finding other jobs and to stimulate appropriate community action to create new jobs.
Smaller communities program.
By the end of the fiscal year, the smaller communities program was in operation in 16 States, providing through mobile teams of interviewers, counselors, and community volunteers a full range of ES services to residents of rural areas.
In addition to serving 50,802 rural residents in 45 areas, the mobile teams prepared manpower resource reports on each area for use by community groups in attracting new nonfarm jobs to the area.
Occupational analysis.
Employment service occupational analysts in eight field centers and five occupational analysis special projects analyzed jobs in many industries.
Their principal concern was with occupations and work activities undergoing change because of automation, new materials, or new products; job reengineering; and new approaches to content and length of training.
Special research was directed to development of more effective local office job information tools and improved occupational analysis techniques.
The revised third edition of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles was published in two volumes.
It contains listings of jobs by title in volume I and by occupation, industry, and worker traits in volume II.
The dictionary describes occupations in more than 200 different industries and contains 36,000 job titles and 23,000 job definitions.
A revised “Health Careers Guidebook” was prepared to reach young people interested in a career.
It provides information—for each of more than 200 occupations—on education, training, and licensing requirements, job prospects, salaries and working conditions, personal qualifications required, and sources for additional information.
USES test research.
To develop testing tools for use in counseling the disadvantaged, a series of job readiness tests was begun—achievement tests of basic reading and arithmetic skills.
Content and format of these tests were designed for use with disadvantaged older youth and adults, and norms will indicate the minimum levels of these basic skills required by occupations.
A contract for construction of items to be used was placed with an outside organization.
Also begun was development of a nonreading form of the USES General Aptitude Test Battery to provide aptitude measures useful in counseling the disadvantaged.
This research includes construction of new test items, devising new test directions, pretesting orientation techniques, and standardizing the new tests on disadvantaged individuals.
The Office of Farm Labor Service of the Bureau worked in fiscal year 1966 with State employment services, other offices of the Manpower Administration, and the Office of the Secretary of Labor to increase employment opportunities for domestic farmworkers and to improve living and working conditions for seasonal farmworkers.
Special Federal-State recruiting teams sought to increase the sources of seasonal farmworkers and thus their numbers, to improve the quality of referrals and the flow of information on labor supply and demand, and to help employers coordinate labor requirements so that labor would be available when needed.
With termination of the supplementary Mexican worker program under Public Law 78 on December 31, 1964, tens of thousands of additional farm jobs became available to U.S. workers, and terms and conditions of agricultural employment in affected areas improved significantly.
Department of Labor criteria applicable to growers seeking to import aliens are designed to insure that U.S. workers are offered adequate wages and living and working conditions, a work contract, and in some cases transportation.
Bumper crops were harvested in 1965, but significant labor shortages developed in only three or four crops in as many areas.
Success of the first year's transition from almost complete dependence on foreign farm labor in some parts of the country was reflected in an 83-percent reduction in its use—from 200,000 in calendar year 1964 to fewer than 36,000 in 1965.
Since agricultural activities do not lend themselves to reporting on a fiscal year basis, the workload figures which follow are for calendar year 1965.
Some 4,700,000 agricultural placements were made by public employment service offices in 1965, a drop of 27 percent from the previous year's total.
Contributing to the decline were heavy mechanization in the harvesting of fall crops, particularly cotton, and more careful selection and referral resulting in greater worker stability on the job.
For the first vear in which local employment offices recorded separately agricultural placements of youth under 22, they reported 1,164,471.
Day-haul programs specifically for youth were operated in 230 permanent locations in 161 towns, and 1,137 other day-haul points were established in selected areas to meet specific requirements of heavy farm labor demand.
Placements of youth in farm jobs where they lived on the farm under supervised conditions totaled 1,751.
Three special vouth recruitment programs were conducted during 1965: (1) A-TEAMS (Athletes in Temporary Employment as Agricultural Manpower) resulted in 3,225 farm placements of high school boys, supervised in most cases by a coach or teacher; (2) college summer recruitment provided farm jobs for some 5,000 students; and (3) Project Growth, an experimental program, provided testing, counseling, training, and work experience to 760 disadvantaged youth.
On-reservation local offices and itinerant points reported 16,160 placements of Indians in farm jobs, while off-reservation offices and points accounted for another 13,840 such placements.
Employers in 13 States contracted for employment of 17,382 Puerto Ricans for farmwork.
This figure, a record high and an increase of 2,754 over the previous year, reflected improved recruiting, information, and contract procedures.
Training in agricultural occupations was approved for 7,253 individuals participating in 167 projects under the Manpower Development and Training Act and the Area Redevelopment Act.
Under the annual worker plan, designed to provide consecutive seasonal farm jobs to migratory workers, State employment services registered some 13,400 groups of migrants, composed of 191,700 individuals of whom 145,192 were adult workers.
For the first time, State employment services were involved in coordination of the worker migration at the end of the sugarbeet season from the Minnesota-North Dakota area into jobs in other States.
Farm labor representatives directed some 2,600 such workers to other employment.
Registration certificates and identification cards issued under the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act totaled 1,389 in calendar year 1965.
The act, which became effective January 1, 1965, requires a farm labor contractor or crew leader to register with the U.S. Department of Labor if he "recruits, solicits, hires, furnishes, or transports 10 or more migrant workers (excluding members of his immediate family), in any calendar year, for interstate agricultural employment."
Many contractors had difficulty in obtaining the required insurance and paying for it.
During the year, the Ofice of Farm Labor Service collaborated with the insurance industry in preparing a policy which would meet requirements of the act and could be offered at a cost which most contractors could afford.
The principal activity of the Office of Farm Labor Service for foreign workers has been in the area of temporary farmworkers.
78 program on December 31, 1964, all such temporary workers have entered under the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Regulations issued by the Department of Justice require employers seeking temporary foreign farmworkers to get a certification from the Department of Labor stating that no U.S. workers are available and that the wages and working conditions meet prevailing standards.
Applications filed with State employment services by growers seeking to import aliens were investigated to determine whether reasonable effort had been made to recruit local, intrastate, or interstate workers and whether the employer was complying with regulations of the Department of Labor designed to protect U.S. workers.
If an employer complied with criteria but could not obtain domestic workers, the Secretary of Labor would certify to their unavailability.
Employment of Mexican nationals on U.S. farms peaked at 16,650 in September 1965, compared with a high of 82,140 in the previous year.
All such workers in 1965 were employed in California.
Peak employment of British West Indians, used mostly in Florida crops, dropped from 15,062 in December 1964 to a 1965 high of only 8,478 in September.
Canadian workers, most of whom were employed in Maine potato and maple sugar work, dropped in number from 7,812 to 4,223 at the peak employment period which occurred in September in both 1964 and 1965.
Japanese and Filipino employment reached a record low of 250 at the end of 1965.
These workers, who contract for 3 years, are employed under special work training agreements between their governments and the United States.
Basque sheepherders brought to the United States under special legislation numbered 407 in calendar year 1965.
Requests certified for permanent entry of immigrants as agricultural workers totaled 44 in calendar year 1965, compared with 1,074 in 1964.
Some 51 million workers in commerce, industry, and government, including the Armed Forces, were covered under the Federal-State unemployment insurance system in fiscal year 1966.
Another 0.8 million railroad workers were insured against unemployment under a separate system administered by the Railroad Retirement Board.
Unemployment insurance benefits help workers to pay basic living expenses between jobs and, by sustaining purchasing power, serve as a stabilizing influence on the Nation's economy.
Under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act, an excise tax of 3.1 percent is levied on the first $3,000 of payrolls of employers with four employees or more in 20 weeks in a year.
Against that tax a credit of up to 2.7 percent is allowed for taxes paid under State unemployment insurance laws which meet certain criteria, leaving the Federal share at 0.4 percent of taxable wages for payment of administrative costs of State employment security agencies.
In fiscal year 1966, employers subject to State unemployment insurance taxes paid about $3 billion.
This amount was deposited in the U.S. Treasury's Unemployment Trust Fund to the credit of each State for the payment of unemployment insurance benefits.
Total benefits of $2.0 billion were paid under the Federal-State system to 5 million insured workers during fiscal year 1966.
Of that amount, $1.9 billion was paid out of State funds to 4,345,000 unemployed workers of commerce and industry; another $94 million was paid to approximately 188,000 unemployed Federal workers and ex-servicemen.
Beneficiaries under the State unemployment insurance programs received an average weekly payment of $38.51 for total unemployment.
Average duration was 11.6 weeks for all beneficiaries and 21.2 weeks for those who exhausted their entitlement.
Benefits for unemployed Federal workers and ex-servicemen are financed through direct Federal appropriations but are paid by employment security agencies as agents of the Federal Government on the basis of the State law.
The average weekly payment for unemployed Federal civilian workers was $39.58 and was paid for an average duration of 16.1 weeks.
The average weekly benefit paid to ex-servicemen was $37.87; average duration, 10.6 weeks.
Reflecting the Nation's strong economic position and higher employment rate, unemployment insurance benefit payments decreased 17.5 percent from fiscal year 1965 level to $1.9 billion on June 30, 1966.
Those benefits represented a national cost rate of 1.35 percent of taxable wages and 0.74 percent of total wages, compared with 1.63 and 0.93 percent, respectively, for the preceding year.
Tax collections for the year increased 0.5 percent to an alltime high of $3.1 billion.
These collections, as those for the past several years, represented a decreasing average tax rate based on either total or taxable wages, their high level being sustained in part by the growth in payrolls.
As a result of all financial transactions during the year—benefit payments, collections, interest of $292.2 million earned on reserve funds, loan transactions, and supplementary items of income and outgo—revenues for fiscal year 1966 exceeded disbursements by $1.4 billion (17.8 percent), compared with 1965's net of $889 million.
At yearend, State reserves in the Unemployment Trust Fund totaled $9.0 billion, compared with $7.6 billion on June 30, 1965.
Under provisions of the Administrative Financing Act of 1954, any excess in receipts from the Federal unemployment tax over State administrative expenses is transferred by the Treasury from the Unemployment Trust Fund to the Federal Unemployment Account.
The latter fund, the source for non-interest-bearing advances to State systems with low reserve funds, is limited to the higher of $550 million or 0.04 percent of the aggregate taxable wages of all States.
It had a cash balance of $228.2 million as of June 30, 1966, reflecting an increase of $74.5 million for the year.
No advances have been made since April 1, 1959.
Total repayments through June 30, 1966, by the three States which had borrowed from the loan fund—Alaska, Michigan, and Pennsylvania—totaled $71.2 million, leaving a balance outstanding of $162.6 million.
Significant changes in unemployment insurance benefit and coverage provisions resulted from State legislative action.
Higher qualifying requirements were enacted in six States (Alabama, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, and Virginia), and significant changes in coverage provisions were made in three States: Michigan extended coverage to employers who had one worker in 20 weeks or who paid calendar year wages of at least $1,000; Utah provided for counties, cities, towns, and other political subdivisions to elect coverage; and Wisconsin extended coverage to employees of the State legislature.
Weekly benefit amount.
To keep pace with rising wage levels, 13 States increased the maximum weekly benefit by amounts ranging from $4 to $10 Alabama, Alaska, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Kentucky, Maryland.
Massachusetts, Michigan, and Virginia.
Hawaii and Kentucky also provided for automatic adjustment of the maximum weekly benefit amount in accordance with changes in average wages.
Increases in the maximum benefit amount became effective in 14 of the 15 States which already had similar provisions for automatic adjustment of the maximum weekly benefit.
Alaska, Illinois, and Michigan also increased maximum dependents' allowances, and Connecticut increased the allowance for each dependent child from $4 to $5 and raised the eligible age limit from 16 to 17 years.
At the end of fiscal year 1966, maximum basic weekly benefit amounts ranged from $20 in Puerto Rico to $65 in California.
Twenty-six States, with 53.3 percent of the Nation's covered workers, had a maximum of $45 or more; in 15 States, with 38.6 percent of the covered workers, the maximum was $50 or more.
The maximum was less than $35 in five States with 5.1 percent of the covered workers.
In States which include dependents' allowances, the "basic" weekly benefit is the benefit for a claimant with no dependents as defined by law.)
In most States, the weekly benefit represented about one-half of the weekly wage for those workers who qualified for less than the maximum benefit amount.
As shown in the following table, the small increases in the maximum weekly benefits effected during fiscal 1966 did not keep pace with increases in wages.
In only 18 States, with 22.8 percent of the covered workers, did the maximum benefit represent 50 percent or more of average weekly wages.
Duration.
Alaska became the first State since 1964 to increase its maximum duration by extending the number of weeks for which a claimant may receive benefits from 26 to 28.
As shown in the following table, eight States, with 15.8 percent of the covered workers, provided uniform duration.
In other States, which varied the duration of benefits with a worker's base-period wages, the maximum duration ranged from 22 to 39 weeks.
Forty-nine States, with 98 percent of covered workers, provided a maximum potential duration of 26 weeks or more.
Financing legislation.
In six States unemployment insurance legislation was enacted affecting the tax rate structure and provisions for assuring reserve fund solvency—Arizona, California, Georgia, Michigan, Missouri, and New York.
The changes in rate structure provided in most cases for higher tax rates.
California increased the taxable wage base from $3,800 to $4,100 with the proviso that after a 1-year period the tax base would revert to $3,800 whenever total revenues of the fund equaled or exceeded total disbursements during any 12-month period ended the preceding June 30.
The fund solvency protective device was deleted by Georgia, one of the four States that made changes in this provision; the others were Arizona, Michigan, and New York.
During fiscal 1966, State employment security agencies acting as agent of the Secretary of Labor paid $129,400,000 in allowances to some 143,600 trainees taking basic educational or vocational training under sections 203 and 241 of the Manpower Development and Training Act (MDTA).
These allowances permitted individuals participating in such training to sustain themselves and their families and to defray separate living and transportation costs when training was provided away from their home areas.
The Bureau's principal concern with respect to MDTA allowances was that State agencies make payments promptly when due but make no unauthorized payments.
During fiscal year 1966, 581 unemployed workers were relocated at a cost of $216,149.28 by State employment security agencies which carried out pilot labor mobility projects under provisions of section 104 of the Manpower Development and Training Act.
Of the total amount, $93,916.51 represented loans advanced, to be repaid over a maximum period of 10 years with interest as provided in the act.
The Automotive Products Trade Act of 1965 (APTA) implements an agreement between the United States and Canada which removes barriers to trade in certain automotive products between the two countries.
The act makes available to eligible industries, firms, and workers adjustment assistance provided by the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
Basically, assistance to workers is provided in the form of weekly allowances and, in some cases, relocation assistance allowances.
In addition, workers may receive special assistance in entering approved training programs to prepare for new jobs.
Subsistence and transportation allowances are payable, if applicable, for weeks of training beginning after January 18, 1966.
The Secretary of Labor entered into agreements with State employment security agencies to act as agents in the administration of the worker adjustment assistance program.
In June 1966, the New Jersey agency paid out $34,735 in worker readjustment allowances under APTA to 42 workers of a closed automobile plant.
This amount included funds reimbursed to the State for unemployment insurance paid for weeks for which the individuals were eligible for adjustment assistance allowances as provided by the act.
Two other APTA petitions filed in behalf of workers were pending at the end of the year.
On the basis of the Bureau's "Guide for Continuous Wage and Benefit History Program in Unemployment Insurance," 35 States at the end of the fiscal year were planning, installing, or operating such a program—an increase of 14 from fiscal 1965 and 29 in the last 2 years.
The continuous history of a sample of workers in and out of claimant status is a valuable source of information about employment and unemployment patterns and a basis for related research.
Basic wage and benefit history information is generally available from State agency files and can be accumulated throughout the work life of covered workers and claimants.
Six States using such data published studies of benefit entitlement or characteristics of workers and claimants—New Hampshire, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Washington, and West Virginia.
Twenty-one other States had tabulations in process for such studies.
Most other unemployment insurance research in fiscal year 1966 involved qualifying requirements, both monetary and nonmonetary issues.
Twelve studies were completed and 19 were in process on monetary issues, including benefit entitlement studies and the quarterly wage method of benefit computations.
Five studies were completed and six were in process on nonmonetary issues, including disqualifications.
Developmental work was begun in fiscal 1966 in a new area of unemployment insurance research—workers' reasons for separation from jobs and for continued unemployment.
Other research conducted by State employment security agencies involved duration and adequacy of benefits, extension of coverage, characteristics of claimants, specific claimant groups, claimants filing in successive benefit years, research in benefit financing, including studies of the effect of changing the taxable wage base, experience rating studies, and the financial impact of legislative changes.
Continuing the special studies of beneficiaries under the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation (TEUC) Act of 1961, two more reports were published in the series of six studies under the general title "The Long-Term Unemployed"; these were "Comparison With Regular Unemployment Compensation Claimants" and "Interstate Claimants."
Work was begun on the last two reports in the TEUC series—"Financial Resources and Adjustments" and "Claimants Under the Federal Unemployment Compensation Programs."
To improve the competency of employment security staff and the effectiveness of services they provide to the public, the Bureau encouraged State agencies to train their qualified counselor candidates, their personnel involved in responsibilities under the Civil Rights Act of 1964, agency executives and those showing executive potential, and personnel working in Youth Opportunity Centers.
The Bureau recommended to State agencies higher qualification standards for employment counseling staff; worked with them toward implementation of those standards; and cooperated in efforts to insure equal opportunity in the internal staffing and other personnel management actions of State agencies.
The Bureau publishes weekly Unemployment Insurance Claims; monthly Area Trends in Employment and Unemployment, Employment Service Review with a separate statistical supplement, and Unemployment Insurance Review and its companion publication Unemployment Insurance Statistics; monthly during the active farm season Farm Labor Developments and an Employment and Wage Supplement; quarterly Employment and Wages; and semiannually the Current Employment Market for Engineers, Scientists, and Technicians.
In fiscal year 1966, the Neighborhood Youth Corps provided more than onehalf million job opportunities for disadvantaged youth in all 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
The program, set up under title I-B of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, is administered by the U.S. Department of Labor, Manpower Administration, under a delegation of authority from the Office of Economic Opportunity.
It is designed to enable unemployed youth, aged 16 through 21, from low-income families to gain the work experience and earn the income that will permit them to stay in school, return to school, or increase their employability.
The 528,000 job opportunities made available through the Neighborhood Youth Corps resulted from 1,477 agreements signed by the Federal Government and local sponsors.
These local sponsors, public or private nonprofit agencies, initiated and developed the projects according to the needs of their individual communities.
The Federal obligation—up to 90 percent of each project—was $266,139,096.
About four out of every five dollars or over 80 percent of the funds spent by the Federal Government in fiscal year 1966 went directly to enrollees in the form of wages and other fringe benefits.
Enrollees were usually paid at the rate of $1.25 per hour.
The Neighborhood Youth Corps operated three major programs: An inschool program, an out-of-school program, and a summer program.
Each was designed to meet the needs of a particular group of disadvantaged young men and women, and to assist them in reaching distinct and separate goals.
Neighborhood Youth Corps projects were sponsored by community action agencies, private nonprofit agencies, or State and local governments.
In fiscal year 1966, schools sponsored 41.5 percent of the 1,477 projects; State and local governments, 23.9 percent; community action agencies, 20.3 percent; and other private and public nonprofit agencies, 14.3 percent.
Sponsors recruited and selected enrollees for the inschool projects.
Sponsors of out-of-school projects often utilized the State employment service offices, frequently through the Youth Opportunity Centers, to recruit and screen enrollees.
Recruiters were instructed to seek out those most in need—the economically disadvantaged who in addition might be culturally deprived, socially or emotionally maladjusted, poor academic achievers, or physically or mentally handicapped.
According to law, the work that NYC enrollees perform must result in new or expanded community services that would not otherwise be provided, must contribute to the development of recreational facilities, or must help to conserve the Nation's natural resources.
In fiscal year 1966, enrollees provided their home communities with a wide variety of necessary services, working as aides in libraries, cafeterias, museums, art galleries, schools, public housing projects, hospitals, parks, forests, old-age and nursing homes, and educational television stations.
By the end of the year, 189,000 enrollment opportunities were provided during the school year for disadvantaged young men and women attending school.
This program was designed to assist young people from low-income families who were considered potential dropouts.
By providing part-time work—up to 15 hours a week—and counseling, the program made it possible to increase the holding power of the schools.
The school principal in Tennessee who wrote that "the success of the program in holding students has been beyond our hopes" is typical of many school officials who have seen their dropout rates decrease among the Neighborhood Youth Corps enrollees in their schools.
In Detroit, for instance, the rate for the students who were in the program was half the rate for the rest of the student body.
And from Dayton, Ohio, a survey of the enrollees made after the project had been in operation a full school year showed that only 57 of the 1,100 potential dropouts participating in the program had actually dropped out of school, and 14 of these 57 left for health reasons.
This same study showed a 25-percent decrease in school absenteeism, a 50-percent cut in the number of students rated unsatisfactory in "effort expended in school," and a 50-percent decrease in the number of enrollees who received an unsatisfactory rating in"citizenship in school."
In the 1966 fiscal year, 99,000 enrollment opportunities were provided for disadvantaged young men and women who did not attend school.
The out-ofschool program, by providing work experience, counseling, remedial education and other supportive services, was designed to encourage young men and women to return to school.
With those youth for whom a return to school was not feasible, the NYC concentrated on the development of good work habits that would make possible specialized vocational training or permanent employment.
Out-of-school enrollees worked up to 32 hours a week.
Enrollment was limited to 6 months unless an enrollee voluntarily took part in an educational training program that would move him toward his vocational goal.
As a result of the Neighborhood Youth Corps, many school dropouts returned to school.
For example, 54 percent of the enrollees working on a project sponsored by the Nebraska Soil and Water Conservation Commission went back to school when the NYC project terminated.
A significant number of enrollees who had worked on Neighborhood Youth Corps projects received permanent employment after their NYC experience.
It is estimated that 75,000 enrollees have moved into career jobs after leaving NYC.
This includes the 14,500 who are estimated to have entered the Armed Forces.
The heartwarming stories of individual success across the country are backed up by the statistical reports received from the Neighborhood Youth Corps projects.
Of the enrollees who leave the out-of-school projects, 25.5 percent do so for permanent jobs.
Another 11.5 percent leave to return to school full time, or to move into other training programs such as Manpower Development and Training Act institutional and on-the-job training programs or the Job Corps.
Others leave for a variety of reasons, some good, some bad.
The 12 percent who leave because they are unable to adjust to a work situation are of particular concern.
It is these youth who require extra effort and additional supportive services.
The summer program (in 1965 and 1966) provided 355,000 enrollment opportunities and was geared to young people eligible for inschool projects.
The emphasis was on return to school, both by the provision of financial assistance and by counseling that encouraged the continuation of education.
Projects generally ran for 10 to 12 weeks, between school closing and Labor Day.
The out-of-school program, in operation throughout the year, also provided jobs during the summer months for dropouts.
This, however, was apart from the regular NYC summer program.
When President Johnson announced the 1966 summer youth opportunity campaign, he directed that an additional 25,000 jobs should be made available to the disadvantaged youth through the Neighborhood Youth Corps.
These job opportunities were concentrated in 30 selected areas of the country where the summer employment problems of disadvantaged youth were particularly acute.
Another component of the NYC summer program was "Operation Champ."
This program, operating in 10 cities and jointly sponsored by the Neighborhood Youth Corps, President's Council on Physical Fitness, and community action program, was designed to provide wholesome recreational activity for youngsters living in target areas.
Approximately 250 NYC youth were recruited in each city to serve as recreational aides or junior counselors in the program.
The NYC placed particular emphasis in the last 6 months of the fiscal year on programs providing expert and continued counseling, health services, training, and education that would help in the transition to permanent employment.
In November 1965, 20 percent of the out-of-school projects offered remedial education and 10 percent of the enrollees in those projects received such education.
In May 1966, 43 percent of the out-of-school projects offered remedial education and 35 percent of all enrollees in out-of-school projects received remedial education.
Enrollee participation was almost equally divided between boys and girls (54 percent male, 46 percent female), with a slightly larger portion of boys in the outof-school program.
Was 18 years of age.
Had completed the 10th grade before dropping out of school.
Was in his second year out of school.
Lived in a family whose income was between $2,000 and $3,000.
Lived in a household of six persons.
Was 17 years of age.
Had completed the 10th grade.
Lived in a household of six persons.
Had had no previous employment experience.
Lived in a family whose income was between $2,000 and $3,000.
Determined enforcement of the Neighborhood Youth Corps policy that there be no discrimination in the selection of enrollees, assignment to work stations, or administration of NYC projects, has made it possible to focus the program on those youth groups most likely to be found among the hard-core unemployed.
Enrollees from minority groups, including Negroes, Spanish Americans, and American Indians, comprised over 50 percent of Neighborhood Youth Corps enrollment.
Thirty-six percent of the enrollees were Negro, with a somewhat higher percentage of Negroes in the out-of-school program (44.6 percent) than for the inschool program (34.3 percent), reflecting the higher unemployment rate of Negro youth.
In fiscal year 1966, over 30 percent of both the job opportunities provided and the Federal funds spent were for rural youth and projects in rural areas.
Forty percent of the disadvantaged youth eligible for enrollment in the Neighborhood Youth Corps live in rural areas.
Thus, the percentage of NYC assistance approached the overall percentage of youths aged 16 to 21 living in poverty in rural America.
The NYC regularly monitors projects to check on the performance of sponsors and to determine the ability of projects to meet their goals.
The monitoring procedure requires field staff to visit each on-going project within the first month of operation and at regular intervals thereafter.
Monitoring is supplemented by selective evaluation to determine the overall effectiveness of the national program.
During fiscal year 1966, the Neighborhood Youth Corps evaluation staff visited and evaluated 67 projects.
These projects ranged in location from Biddeford, Maine, to Los Angeles, Calif., and in size from 14 enrollees in Irwin, Iowa, to over 12,000 enrollees in Los Angeles, Calif.
The youth unemployment rate has been cut substantially since the NYC program was started—from 13.9 percent in January 1965 to 10.7 percent in July 1966.
School officials in city after city where there were NYC projects reported that the school dropout rate had been reduced, that school grades of NYC enrollees had improved, and that absenteeism had decreased.
Police chiefs, judges, and probation officers across the country have linked the presence of NYC projects in their communities to the reduction in crimes committed by youths aged 16 through 21.
With NYC earnings, significant numbers of young people were able for the first time in their lives to assist their families financially, to pay medical bills, and to purchase school supplies and pay school fees.
After NYC enrollment, many youth entered career jobs with the public or private agencies where they had worked as enrollees or with large, private business concerns.
A significant number of NYC enrollees entered more advanced training programs such as the U.S. Department of Labor's MDTA and OJT programs and the Job Corps.
To clarify responsibility and provide for greater depth and flexibility in the administration of staff services to the Manpower Administrator, the Office of Manpower Policy, Evaluation, and Research (OMPER) was established during the fiscal year to replace the existing Office of Manpower, Automation, and Training.
It consists of the following major offices: Office of Planning and Policy, Office of Evaluation and Reports, Office of Manpower Research, and Office of Special Manpower Programs.
In addition, it has a technical information and publications staff and a foreign manpower programs staff.
Functioning as the staff arm of the Manpower Administrator to aid him in carrying out his duties and responsibilities under the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, as amended, OMPER serves as the primary policy, planning, research, and evaluation adviser.
The Office develops and maintains plans for a comprehensive manpower program by the Department of Labor and provides leadership for other governmental agencies, employers, labor unions, and other organizations concerned with manpower problems.
It conducts an extensive research program through its own staff or by grants or contracts with government, public, or private organizations to obtain knowledge and new information for solving manpower problems.
It promotes and develops experimental and demonstration projects for special worker groups and has the responsibility for converting the results of such projects into operational programs.
It evaluates the manpower program, determining the extent to which the goals and objectives are being met.
It also provides technical manpower information for the public and special groups and assists foreign countries in the area of manpower planning and development.
The fundamental purpose of OMPER's research program is to provide a sound base of information and ideas for improving the action programs by which the Department seeks to reduce unemployment and to anticipate and prepare for the manpower needs of our changing economy.
Under authority of the 1965 amendments to the MDTA, OMPER developed grant programs to meet the critical need for new approaches to manpower problems.
During fiscal year 1966, small grants of up to $10,000 were awarded for 65 projects, including 34 to doctoral candidates writing in the manpower field and 31 to established scholars in the social and behavioral sciences for innovative and exploratory manpower research.
The subject fields of study supported by the grants included such topics as racial discrimination; motivation for work and for retraining; special employment problems of women, youth, dropouts, military retirees, and low-income groups; skill shortages; scientific and professional manpower; immigration; training in rural areas; labor-management practices on farms; migrant farmworkers; counseling and testing; labor force participation; and a wide variety of other special areas.
Through its manpower research institutional grant program, OMPER also awarded a total of $515,000 to seven colleges and universities for the development of their manpower research capability.
The seven grantees were selected by a special panel from the Research Subcommittee of the National Manpower Advisory Committee from among 150 interested institutions, 43 of which submitted formal applications.
The grants encourage a wider range of training and experience in the manpower research field and enable the schools to plan and conduct long-term research programs with unified goals.
They also help assure a maximum of stability and efficiency in such programs.
With a research program of broader scope, OMPER can better identify the social, cultural, and educational factors as well as the economic forces which bear upon our system of work and its attendant problems.
The contract research program is devoted, for the most part, to action-oriented research projects concerned with immediate and fundamental manpower problems.
Manpower projections: Methodological techniques for projecting manpower requirements at the local levels were developed to assist in the forecast of job openings by industry and by occupation as an aid to effective economic and manpower planning.
These studies were conducted by the University of Colorado and Temple University.
Technological change: Reasons for management decisions to automate and the impact of technological change on occupational skill requirements were investigated under separate studies by Northeastern University and the University of Denver.
The findings provided valuable insight into the rate of technological development in the industries examined.
Manpower resources: Findings from a survey of persons expected to be in the labor force, but who were not, provided understanding of the factors affecting labor force participation and manpower utilization.
This project was conducted by the University of Houston.
Job finding and placement: Analysis of jobseeking behavior of blue-collar and selected white-collar workers, conducted by the W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, explored the behavioral patterns associated with successful methods of jobseeking.
Another study, made by the University of North Carolina, furnished insight into the operation of the academic job market.
These and other studies developed by the contract research program are outlined in the "1966 Report of the Secretary of Labor on Manpower Research and Training under the MDTA" and in "Manpower and Automation Research," an annual report summarizing OMPER-sponsored projects.
In addition, each completed report is distributed to major libraries and document reference centers, and reports are disseminated widely to organizations and individuals with special interest in the subject.
In fiscal 1966, some 31 new contract research projects were initiated.
Primary emphasis was directed toward the occupational needs, adjustment, and income problems of migratory farmworkers; the employment problems of youth; and the various methods and techniques used by employers to adjust to tightening job markets and skill shortages.
Other research sought information and solutions to such problems as nonparticipation in the labor force of eligible workers; occupational choice and occupational fitness; Negro participation in apprenticeship programs; and redesign of jobs to utilize the skills of older workers.
Among the more significant new research contracts developed during the year was a major three-phase study of the occupational adjustment of recent lowincome southern inmigrants to a northern city.
Under contract with the Bureau of Social Science Research, the first phase of this study will investigate the occupational experiences and adjustment problems of newcomers with less than 2 years' residency in Cleveland and compare them with those of long-term residents.
The second phase will provide the types of services considered necessary for better occupational adjustment of the inmigrants.
The final phase will assess the occupational adjustment actually made.
Another important contract continues a series of studies by Columbia University to identify and analyze various economic sectors to determine the role of manpower resources in the expansion of the economy.
This project will provide analytical studies in the fields of paramedical manpower and the expansion of the health service industry, State development efforts to expand employment, industry employment trends by counties, and the process by which young men establish work careers after graduation from high school.
The contract review panels introduced this year made important contributions to the contract research program.
The panels have included specialists from many disciplines relevant to manpower problems, and their constructive suggestions have significantly strengthened a number of this year's studies.
As in previous years, the OMPER research staff assisted in the preparation of the Department's "Report on Manpower Requirements, Resources, Utilization, and Training" incorporated into the annual "Manpower Report of the President."
A research bulletin entitled "Unused Manpower: T'he Nation's Loss," which examines the manpower utilization of adult men, putting particular emphasis on the sharp disparities that exist in the pattern of utilization among different population groups.
A study entitled "Attitudes and Motives of MDTA Trainees: A Pilot Investigation," which points out some of the psychological factors underlying the willingness of some trainees to complete MDTA courses and the indifference of others.
This preliminary staff study is being followed up by contract research designed to consider, in larger scale, how attitudes and motivations can be developed as positive factors in the learning of new skills.
A research bulletin, "Training Needs in Correctional Institutions," which, together with knowledge gained from related MDTA demonstration projects, led to improvements in existing departmental programs to aid the ex-offender in obtaining training or employment, and to the introduction of legislation to launch a nationwide inprison job training program.
Preparation of a research bulletin which will provide information on the new methods being explored in various projects around the country to train nonprofessional workers—many disadvantaged themselves-—to become aides to professional workers in social work, public welfare, recreation, child care, health services, and educational fields.
The findings should be useful for MDTA training, job restructuring in these occupational areas, and for clarifying the working relationships between professionals and nonprofessionals serving the same clients.
A study which will assess the special training needs of the mentally restored, the barriers to their employment, and the need for supportive services related to their employment.
The findings should help to provide a basis for additional programs that might be needed.
Research on the military manpower situation and implications for the civilian labor force.
The major objectives are to analyze the impact of the demand for military personnel on the quantity and quality of the civilian labor force, and the impact of the changing and highly erratic demands for military personnel on the individuals involved—that is, the effects of the draft on the individual's employment, education, and training activities.
Such an analysis will provide information valuable in developing military selection techniques more consistent with our concern to develop fully the potential of all segments of our labor force.
The Coordinating Committee on Manpower Research and its several subcommittees, chaired by the Research Office of OMPER, are departmentwide in membership and serve to coordinate research and exchange information about the Department of Labor manpower research program.
With the cooperation of the committee's member bureaus, OMPER prepares and regularly updates a descriptive inventory of all manpower research conducted or sponsored by the Department.
The inventory has proved to be an effective device for communicating the progress of research projects among the participating bureaus.
OMPER continued to develop policies and standards to carry out the provisions of the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, as amended.
A major part of this activity was concerned with implementing the 1965 amendments to the act.
Amendments covering income maintenance of trainees, research and experimental programs, and the merging of the training provisions of the Area Redevelopment Act into MDTA were implemented through promulgation of policies and standards.
Other areas where policies and standards were developed included the delegation of approval authority for small projects; management of program funds; expansion of the use of individual referrals; implementation of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1962; establishment of guidelines for wage rates of trainees in occupations not covered by the Federal minimum wage; and coupling of various types of training programs.
As an important adjunct to its policy development responsibilities, OMPER continued to develop the Manpower Administration's position on proposed Federal legislation and make recommendations and provide supporting policy papers on proposed amendments to the MDTA.
It also continued to prepare recommended disposition of appeals to the Manpower Administrator by trainees concerning their eligibility for MDTA allowances.
Leadership was provided in developing plans for specific manpower program applications.
One significant undertaking of this nature involved implementing the trainee placement assistance demonstration projects authorized by a 1965 amendment to the MDTA.
Negotiation of a contract with a surety bond underwriter made the benefits of this program available to persons who have hitherto been denied access to jobs requiring surety bonds for protection of the employer.
OMPER provided leadership in the initiation of three closely related actions which should effect major improvements and savings in planning, budgeting, and administering training programs within the Manpower Administration.
These were: (1) A sophisticated program and budget management system recommended by the Bureau of the Budget; (2) a system of cost/benefit analysis which provides a method for comparing different training programs and for exploring alternatives to training; and (3) a coordinated National-State manpower development planning system.
This system is geared to national needs but provides broad latitude for the accommodation of special needs and situations within a given State.
It is designed to guide and direct the States in carrying out institutional and on-the-job training programs and was established with the cooperation of other interested agencies.
Several unique contributions to the administration of the Nation's manpower programs were made during the year.
OMPER provided leadership and coordination of the interagency effort to redirect MDTA programs toward meeting the needs of skill shortage occupations and training disadvantaged workers.
It also organized the Joint Conference on MDTA Program Approvals and Administration held in September 1965.
This conference marked the first time that national and regional office staff of the Departments of Labor and of Health, Education, and Welfare met to discuss interagency programs.
The conference contributed significantly to perfecting the national-State manpower development planning system.
OMPER also convened an Interagency Task Force on Counseling.
The report of this committee contains information on the supply of and demand for occupational counselors and recommendations relating to counselor training, research, and related matters.
A significant contribution was made by OMPER to the work of the White House Conference to Fulfill These Rights, held in June 1966.
Staff members served as the principal assistants to the Task Force on Economic Security and Welfare which was established to prepare preliminary recommendations for the Conference.
During the Conference, OMPER representatives participated on teams which led panel discussions on economic security and welfare.
Subsequently, these staff members drafted relevant sections of the Conference's final report.
Recommendations of the Conference included establishing metropolitan jobs councils to expand employment opportunities for Negroes in major urban areas; creating a rural jobs task force to develop and coordinate programs for rural Negroes; and developing a comprehensive human resource program, government-financed employment programs, and special programs for Negro youth.
Evaluation studies were expanded during fiscal 1966 to include other manpower programs as well as MDTA.
For example, a nationwide study was completed on the Youth Opportunity Center (YOC) program which is conducted under the Federal-State employment service system.
Field work was completed on an evaluation of the effectiveness of manpower programs in situations of significant employment change, i.e., mass layoffs and hirings.
MDTA evaluations were completed on the effectiveness of the training under the MDTA, on time gaps in MDTA institutional project development, on cost reduction methods in institutional and OJT projects, and on the application of the 1963 and 1965 amendments to the act.
In addition, field work was completed on a nationwide study of the comparative status of persons who completed, dropped out from, or failed to enter MDTA training.
Significant findings and conclusions from completed reports included the following: Seven out of eight persons interviewed after completion of training had received full-time steady employment within a few months after the termination of training; training enabled the enrollees to reinstate and improve their earning capacity; intervals between planning of an MDTA project and its approval and between funding and its beginning operation need reduction; OJT projects are giving some of the best returns on investment of the MDTA projects, notwithstanding the additional costs of training the disadvantaged; a priority system of costs is needed in institutional projects; the present training allowance program was found to be basically sound; extension of the MDTA program into the 1970's is warranted; and although YOC's are successful in attracting certain youth not otherwise reached, additional innovative techniques and further specialized staff training are needed.
A major activity of fiscal year 1966 was the improvement of statistical reporting on MDTA program operations and related manpower programs for which the Department's Manpower Administration has responsibility.
An important reporting function during the year was the coordination of statistical reporting and preparation of a summary report on monthly developments on the President's job development program to stimulate training and job opportunities in the field of service and related occupations.
Analytical evaluation studies continued.
One of these, "Training of Public Assistance Recipients Under the MDTA," was published in April.
Another, a study of the earnings mobility of MDTA trainees, was completed at the end of the year and scheduled for early publication.
Liaison with other Federal agencies concerned with manpower statistics was better coordinated and strengthened during the year.
Some products of this interrelationship included the processing of OMPER information for use in a special Office of Economic Opportunity report; furnishing special tabulations to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights on institutional and OJT training programs; participating with the Office of Education, the Economic Development Administration, Bureau of the Budget, and other interagency representatives of the President's Committee on Manpower to standardize data collected on Federal programs supporting manpower development and utilization; processing data for mobility demonstration projects; developing a design for a reporting system on basic education programs administered on an interagency basis; and developing a roster of draft-eligible doctors to supplement Selective Service procedures.
Experimental and demonstration (E&D) activities under the MDTA were expanded during fiscal 1966 as a result of the 1965 amendments to the act.
Under this program, projects are conducted through contracts or grants to private or public organizations to produce new knowledge, improve techniques, and demonstrate the effectiveness of specialized methods to meet manpower, employment, and training problems.
They are primarily directed toward disadvantaged groups.
Much attention was paid during the year to converting early and successful demonstration projects into continuing operations.
These programs are usually administered through such agencies as the Office of Economic Opportunity, the U.S. Employment Service, Neighborhood Youth Corps, or other vocational rehabilitation or youth-serving groups.
Approximately 100 projects were contracted for during the fiscal year.
Urban "ghetto area" projects sought through special identification, outreach, training, and job placement efforts to develop employability for minority and other groups whose members are unemployed or underemployed.
Many tried new ways to link separate programs.
Rural projects drew on organizations with special capability or potential to reach and develop new skills and employment opportunities for low-income rural residents or migrants with limited education.
Youth projects for the summer were developed to test innovative approaches to improving preparation of youth for adult work life.
A series of projects was initiated for prison inmates, parolees, or those on probation to develop new means of smoothing their entry into employment, thereby reducing pressures toward further criminal activity.
For the socially and emotionally handicapped, a multiproject program was initiated to determine the usefulness of physical disability rehabilitation facilities and concepts as means for removing obstacles to effective employment.
To encourage innovation in employment service practices, projects were undertaken through State employment service agencies to explore new techniques for meeting employment difficulties of specific groups.
Other project efforts were designed to find new occupations which would be particularly meaningful for the disadvantaged, to remove entry barriers to specific occupations, and improve testing and counseling techniques for those for whom conventional practices were inappropriate.
Two demonstration activities specially authorized by title I of the MDTA are the mobility demonstration projects and the bonding assistance project.
The former were undertaken to determine the feasibility and desirability of providing financial and other assistance for unemployed workers with little prospect for employment in their home area to move to jobs in other areas where workers are needed.
The bonding assistance demonstration project was initiated to determine whether underwriting of special bonding can eliminate bars to employment for persons with police records who do not qualify for normal bonding required for many jobs.
Experiences and developments in other countries which have domestic manpower policy implications have been under continuing study.
Major staff research consisted of a study on manpower policies and programs in France, Great Britain, the Netherlands, Sweden, and West Germany.
It found that manpower policies in these countries are coordinated to meet national objectives.
A monograph entitled "European Apprenticeship," prepared under contract with the International Labor Organization, was issued during the year.
It describes the effects of educational, social, and technical development on apprenticeship training practices in eight European countries.
Because of the growing importance of trained manpower to economic growth and the innovations resulting from new manpower research and development programs, representatives of other countries have been visiting the United States to study and compare manpower programs.
Fifty-seven visitors from 26 countries, ranging from industrialized Japan, Sweden, and Great Britain to the developing nations of Korea, Jamaica, and Vietnam were briefed on manpower policy and programs in the United States.