The meaningful report of the work of the Department of Labor in 1967 would omit anything that happened in the Department and would be about what happened in the lives of American wage earners; for this was a year of reassertion of individual values and of increased questioning of the relevance of institutional achievements.
That more meaningful report would not separate out this one Department's contributions to the current assault on poverty, ignorance, and bigotry; for it is one of the unprecedented characteristics of this attack that it has been an essential combination of what were previously divided actions.
Nor would that report use previous accomplishment as a measure of current achievement; for the most basic thing happening today in the American society is the recognition of the human potential —rather than any precedent—as the only proper measurement of present endeavors.
And "economic indicators" would yield to "social indicators"—as a reflection of the fact that the economy is only a servant of the human purpose.
This is not that more meaningful report.
There are not the means at hand to prepare it.
What is in fact reported can only borrow a little of validity from recognizing and pointing out the larger context in which the work of the men and women in the Department find our ultimate relevancy.
This is reflected, editorially, only in organizing this 1967 report more around the identification of human purposes than programs or bureaus.
A sixth successive year of national prosperity focused attention on that kind of unemployment which remains even when the economy is functioning uncommonly well and on a sustained basis.
Unemployment, and underemployment and subemployment, have emerged as human, not just economic, conditions.
It was a source of proper national pride that in 1967 between 1½ and 2 million persons who would otherwise probably have been idle were in school, in training, or on jobs as a result of new and more direct approaches to the problems of severe disadvantage.
In 1967, two factors guided the marshaling of public and private resources to insure that everyone might enjoy the economic reward and self-respect that flow from productive employment.
First, it was recognized that further economic growth would not alone rescue prosperity's disadvantaged—the ill-educated, the unskilled, the victims of prejudice, the aged, the unhealthy.
The employment problems of prosperity's disadvantaged are individual, not just economic, and have to be met on a personal basis.
Second, the manpower programs were focused more sharply on particular areas in which unemployment and underemployment were concentrated.
These efforts were also focused on the very hardest cases: people who cannot move immediately into permanent jobs because of individual drawbacks.
The need for concentrating the "firepower" of the manpower programs became crystal clear following a series of comprehensive surveys made during the year in target slum areas of major U.S. cities.
These surveys revealed, in the starkest terms, that there are two Americas—one characterized by general affluence and comfort, the other by grim deprivation and daily misery.
Providing the first detailed information on the depth of the employment plight of inner-city residents, these surveys showed a jobless rate in these areas 3 times that of the Nation as a whole with 1 out of every 3 residents of these blighted city areas suffering a serious employment problem.
The basic concept of the concentrated job effort is to provide in one contract with one sponsor in a target area all services necessary to enable a slum resident to find and hold a steady job at a living wage.
Most importantly, the program is not one where government "goes it alone."
The effort relies heavily on the resources and cooperation of employers in the community.
In addition to the Concentrated Employment Program, the Department of Labor continued to provide a wide range of services to other American workers with special needs.
In 1967, all State employment security agencies were engaged in a "Human Resources Development Program" that seeks to identify the seriously disadvantaged and help them overcome their personal employment problems.
Offering counseling, placement, and followup services, the program features referral of the disadvantaged to jobs, training, or other services they might need to become productive workers.
It brings residents of low-income neighborhoods into meaningful contact with the manpower services that seek to lead them as swiftly as possible to full-time jobs.
Through its wide scope of job programs and services, the Department of Labor continued to provide special help for groups of citizens with special problems.
Alarmingly, youth continued to suffer an unemployment rate 3 times as great as that of the rate for all workers.
To channel disadvantaged youth toward meaningful and productive lives, Youth Opportunity Centers were operated by State employment services in strategic locations across the Nation.
These centers provide young people with a host of services and refer them either to jobs or to such worthwhile programs as the Neighborhood Youth Corps or the Job Corps.
By the end of the fiscal year, 167 centers in 128 areas had registered more than 1.1 million youth aged 16 to 22 and had placed 319,000 in jobs.
Apprenticeship Information Centers were serving youths in areas with large concentrations of minority groups in 26 major cities across the country.
At these centers, young people were given current information on apprenticeship requirements and openings in nearby industries, and hundreds were referred for placement.
In addition, the Department played a major part in the President's Youth Opportunity and Stay-in-School Campaigns during the fiscal year.
Under the summer campaign, more than 1 million jobs were provided 16- to 21-year-old youths.
Mostly in the private sector of the economy, these jobs enabled a large body of young people to earn enough money to continue their education.
Still other youths were to launch work careers because of this summer program.
The Stay-in-School effort probably resulted in an additional 900,000 young people staying in school.
The Department joined forces with other Federal agencies in rallying the support of private industry, agriculture, and labor in steering young Americans back to school in the fall.
Federal demonstration projects were conducted in five cities to develop new and improved methods of serving older workers.
Funds were allocated to State employment services for 291 new positions to staff older worker service units in 20 major cities.
During the year, more than 1.2 million applicants 45 years of age and over were placed in nonagricultural jobs through State employment services.
Handicapped persons filed a record of 507,100 new applications with employment service offices in fiscal 1967—9.4 percent more than in the preceding year.
Placement of handicapped persons totaled more than 303,300.
As the minority-group unemployment rate remained at least twice as high as the general rate, the Department intensified its efforts to improve employment conditions for members of minority groups.
Almost one-third of the estimated 275,000 enrollees receiving skill training under the Manpower Development and Training Act were nonwhite or Spanish-speaking; these groups comprised more than half of the enrollment in the Neighborhood Youth Corps out-ofschool program.
Notable in the efforts to promote fuller use of women workers was the special emphasis given to providing day-care facilities for the children of low-income working mothers.
In view of the increasing number of servicemen returning to civilian life, special employment services for veterans played an important part in the Department's overall program.
These services include preferential job placement and counseling in State employment security agencies, apprentice training, occupational training under the Manpower Development and Training Act, unemployment compensation, and provision of vital occupational outlook information.
The Department cooperated with the Department of Defense in planning pilot training projects to groom military personnel for civilian jobs before they leave the Armed Forces.
The Department also determined specific training needs of several other areas with suitable training facilities for similar projects.
The year saw further progress toward increasing the employment opportunities and bettering the living and working conditions of farmworkers.
Agricultural employers were provided with labor supply information, and efforts were made to coordinate large segments of the migrant labor force to meet the demand for workers at times of need.
In addition, a full range of employment services was brought to residents of rural areas of 18 States through the Smaller Communities Program, in which mobile units are sent into isolated areas.
Several manpower projects explored the problems of preparing rural youth for work in urban areas.
Rural residents benefited from Federal job-training and work-experience programs.
So, in 1967, a series of strategic programs operated to insure that every citizen has, in President Johnson's words,"an opportunity to unlock his own potential."
In fiscal 1967, 312,000 training opportunities were provided under MDTA, bringing to 1,039,600 the number of such opportunities made available since 1962.
Experimental and demonstration (E&D) activities are conducted through grants or contracts to public and private organizations to meet more effectively the job and training needs of the disadvantaged.
During the fiscal year, nearly 100 of these projects were contracted for under MDTA.
The Department's efforts to promote apprenticeship paid rich dividends in 1967 as the most significant gains in recent years were made in this area.
At midyear, nearly 208,000 apprentices were in training under programs registered with the Department or State apprenticeship agencies.
In calendar 1966, about 85,000 new apprentices were registered—an increase of 16,500 over the year.
The Department continued to seek equal opportunity in apprenticeship in 1967.
In States where it is the registration agency, the Department made a determined effort to have sponsors with more than five apprentices in their program come into voluntary compliance with regulations on nondiscrimination in apprenticeship.
One of the most significant developments in this area was the establishment of a top-level committee comprised of departmental officials and five general presidents from the Building and Construction Trades Department, AFL-CIO, to deal with problems in construction apprenticeship.
Several programs under the antipoverty law—the Economic Opportunity Act—seek to eliminate barriers to employment of disadvantaged persons through work-experience and training programs.
These include the Neighborhood Youth Corps, New Careers, Operation Mainstream, and a Special Impact effort to help the urban poor.
Since its inception in 1965, the Neighborhood Youth Corps has helped more than 1 million young people from low-income families to stay in school, return to school, or prepare for permanent jobs.
In fiscal 1967, more than half a million youth worked in nearly 1,500 hometown projects—projects initiated, developed, and sponsored by public and private organizations in local communities.
Each kind of project seeks to meet the needs of a particular group of young men and women from low-income families, and to assist them in reaching distinct goals.
Project sponsors have included community action agencies, public schools, conservation groups, forestry and rural development agencies, State and municipal agencies, Indian tribes, and libraries and hospitals.
In 1967, the program helped over 390,000 poor youths to continue their education and over 160,000 out-of-school and unemployed youths to gain invaluable work experience, enabling many of them to launch job careers.
The New Careers, Operation Mainstream, and Special Impact programs were created under 1966 amendments to the antipoverty law.
Each program, in a different way, strives to prepare the disadvantaged for a world of work that all too often has been cold or closed to them all their lives.
Holding out bright new promise for the unemployed and underemployed, these programs were just getting their first head of steam in 1967.
New Careers involves the restructuring of jobs in such services as health, education, welfare, and public safety to provide meaningful careers for individuals from low-income families and to make more effective use of professional staffs.
The disadvantaged are being trained for new careers, while nurses, doctors, teachers, laboratory technicians, social workers, law enforcement officials, and counselors are being freed from duties requiring less than professional skills.
Operation Mainstream seeks to rehabilitate individuals and communities through projects that improve the local environment.
The program provides training for low-income adults who build roads, drainage ditches, sewer lines, and water sheds, eliminate air and water pollution hazards, protect wildlife, conserve natural resources, and develop community cooperatives.
Training projects are located in areas with high unemployment or with little or no industrialization.
Special Impact seeks to attack the critical problems that plague urban areas with high concentrations of low-income residents.
Unemploved and underemployed youths in these areas who are 16 or over receive work-training and experience in projects that reshape the social and physical environment of their neighborhoods.
Project activities may include renovating houses or apartments, improving health facilities, developing vestpocket parks, expanding community programs, or developing recreational facilities.
Priority is given to projects that provide a wide range of services and lead to permanent jobs.
At the same time, efforts continue to help working citizens in other ways, including the provision of income maintenance for the jobless.
When a man or woman gets laid off from work, a series of major problems usually develops.
Probably the biggest problem is figuring how to make ends meet until another job can be found.
One of the goals of the Nation's income-maintenance program is to help ease the suffering that so often results from involuntary joblessness.
Unemployment insurance benefits help workers to pay basic living expenses between jobs.
Moreover, by sustaining purchasing power, these benefits serve as a stabilizing influence on the country's economy.
In 1967, some 55 million workers in commerce, industry, and government, including the Armed Forces, were covered under the Federal-State unemployment insurance system administered by the Department of Labor.
In addition to the workers covered under this system, 700,000 railroad workers were insured against unemployment under a system administered by the Railroad Retirement Board.
During the year, 5 million workers—many of them family breadwinners—were paid $2 billion in unemployment insurance benefits under the Federal-State system.
These jobless persons received an average weekly payment of $41.05 for an average of 11.1 weeks for all beneficiaries and 20.9 weeks for those exhausting their entitlement.
Unemployed Federal civilian workers received $41.08 for an average of 14.9 weeks and ex-servicemen $41.26 for an average of 9.3 weeks.
In 1967, the trend toward higher weekly benefits and more stringent qualifying requirements continued as several States amended their unemployment insurance laws.
Sixteen States increased their maximum weekly benefits from $2 to $10, with four of these States providing for automatic adjustment in weekly benefits in accordance with changes in average State wages.
Increases also became effective in the District of Columbia and 15 States that had previously adopted provisions for automatic adjustment of the maximum weekly benefit.
At the end of the year, the maximum weekly benefit ranged from $28 in Puerto Rico to $66 in Hawaii.
It was $45 or more in 30 States that accounted for over 58 percent of the Nation's covered workers, and at least $50 in 19 States with 41.8 percent of the covered workers.
Other forms of financial aid for the jobless are also administered by the Department.
In 1967, some 128,000 persons taking basic educational and vocational training under the Manpower Development and Training Act were paid approximately $137 million in allowances.
These allowances permitted trainees to sustain themselves and their families and helped defray separate living and transportation costs when training was provided away from their home areas.
Also during the year, 2,734 workers who lost their jobs involuntarily participated in labor mobility projects under the MDTA and were paid about $900,000 in loans and grants to relocate to fulltime employment in other areas.
Some workers who lose their jobs as a result of a trade agreement between the U.S. and Canada are eligible to apply for adjustment assistance under the Automotive Products Trade Act of 1965.
In 1967, 1,340 workers of automotive products manufacturing and parts assembly plants or components that cut back or closed because of the trade agreement were paid $1,878,800 in adjustment assistance allowances by five States.
The Department administers six Federal workmen's compensation laws to protect covered employees in the event of a work injury.
An estimated 4.5 million employees are protected under these laws, including 2.9 million civilian employees of the Federal Government and more than 300,000 employees of private industry in the District of Columbia.
As a result of historic liberalization of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act benefit structure during the fiscal year, costs jumped nearly $14 million over the previous year's level to $89,093,209.
This represented an over-the-year increase of 18.5 percent.
The largest expenditure, $44.9 million, went as disability compensation for regular civilian Federal employees.
The largest group of private employees subject to Federal workmen's compensation administration are those covered by the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
Under this law, the estimated evaluation of cases closed (excluding medical costs) was $15,434,036, slightly lower than the figure for the previous year.
Activity increased during the year to insure that Americans are paid decent wages and work under good conditions.
For nearly 30 years, the Fair Labor Standards Act, with its minimum wage and other vital provisions, has stood as a mighty bulwark for human dignity and economic progress.
In today's fight against poverty and disadvantage in big-city and rural slums, this law assumes even greater importance.
The most far-reaching improvements ever made in the act become effective during 1967.
On February 1, 1967, amendments increased the minimum wage for 32.3 million workers who were already covered by the law and brought over 9 million more employees under its provisions.
In addition to the minimum wage, this law offers a wide range of other vital protections for our working people.
It contains overtime pay provisions, prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in the payment of wages, and regulates employment of children and youth.
As a result of the 1966 amendments, the law now covers more than 41 million workers.
Thus, an ever-increasing number of working Americans are earning more pay and can build better futures for their families and themselves.
Of the 9 million employees covered by the minimum wage for the first time, 3.1 million are in services, 2.4 million in government, 2.2 million in retail trade, 600,000 in construction, and 500,000 in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries.
These industries account for more than 95 percent of the total extension.
The law applies to employees individually engaged in or producing goods for interstate commerce, and to employees in certain enterprises.
The extension of coverage was achieved through broadening the definition of a covered enterprise and the revision or elimination of some exemptions.
The dollar-volume test for coverage of enterprises was reduced from $1 million to $500,000 in gross annual business volume effective February 1, 1967, and to $250,000 beginning February 1, 1969.
Coverage was extended without a dollarvolume test to employees of laundries and drycleaners, construction enterprises, non-Federal hospitals, resident-care facilities, elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education, whether public or private.
These new amendments provided more than one pay standard.
For employment that was covered before the amendments, the minimum wage was increased from $1.25 to $1.40 an hour on February 1, 1967, and to $1.60 a year later.
For newly covered nonfarm work, the minimum was set at $1.00 an hour effective February 1, increasing by 15 cents a year until reaching a $1.60 rate on February 1, 1971.
The initial minimum wage rate for covered farmwork is also $1.00 an hour, and will reach a minimum of $1.30 on February 1,1969.
The expanded coverage under the new amendments for workers in such activities as laundries, hotels, restaurants, farms, hospitals, and resident-care facilities was of particular significance to nonwhite and women workers, who were heavily concentrated in these fields.
For the first time, the law requires a minimum age of 16 years for employment at any time in agricultural occupations which are declared particularly hazardous by the Secretary of Labor.
The 1966 amendments to the wage-hour law required the drafting of many new or revised provisions for the regulations under the act, resulting in a substantial increase in the number of legal opinions and interpretations in the area of labor standards.
Extensive in character, the amendments created new and novel legal questions, including the constitutionality of some of its new provisions.
Substantial work was required to revise existing interpretative bulletins and to issue new ones in light of the amendments.
Investigations by the Department of Labor play an indispensable role in protecting the rights of working people under the law.
In 1967, these investigations found that 368,582 employees were due $76.1 million under the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, and the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act.
These underpayments included: overtime, $53.7 million; minimum wage, $18.8 million; equal pay, $3.3 million; and the Service Contract Act, $263,000.
In addition, employers agreed to pay 194,496 employees $26.7 million in illegally withheld wages found due in investigations.
Investigations to determine compliance with the child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and the Public Contracts Act turned up 18,536 minors illegally employed.
On the litigation front, 1,817 cases, a new high, were instituted in 1967 under the FLSA and PCA.
Twenty criminal prosecutions were instituted.
Under both of these laws, 1,741 cases were closed with payment of back wages to employees in 887 cases.
One of the most significant litigation achievements was the district court decision upholding the validity of the 1966 extension of the Federal minimum wage to public school and hospital employees.
Twenty-eight States joined in the action seeking to enjoin enforcement of this extension on the grounds it was unconstitutional.
But the court denied the injunction.
Two landmark decisions regarding equal pay for women were rendered.
In the first such case to be decided, the Nevada District Court ordered the pay of two women laboratory analysts raised to that of a man analyst.
This case established the principle that men and women who perform substantially equal work cannot be paid at different rates for all hours worked simply because some specific identifiable part of their time is spent in performing other different duties and that, in such circumstances, a differential is justifiable for only the hours spent on different work.
In the second case, the employer was required to raise the wages of women to the same rate paid to men with whom they worked in an assembly-line packaging operation.
In 1967, the Nation continued to make impressive strides toward achieving better and safer conditions on the job for American workers.
An upsurge of both State and Federal legislative activity brought impressive gains to the Nation's wage earners.
State legislatures enacted nearly 600 new labor laws that provide a broad spectrum of improved protections.
A new minimum wage law in Nebraska and major improvements in 11 other States.
Increased protection under safety or workmen's compensation laws in 17 States for workers exposed to radiation hazards.
Increased benefits or other improvements in workmen's compensation protection in about half of the States.
Greater protection of workers' earnings against wage garnishment in six States.
Safety standards were developed to protect workers in a variety of employment areas.
This included safety and health standards under the 1966 Arts and Humanities and Vocational Rehabilitation Acts, the Service Contract Act, and the Public Contracts Act.
The disclosure of a high incidence of lung cancer among uranium miners stirred the conscience of the Nation in 1967.
As a result of this disclosure, radiation standards for uranium mines engaged in public contracts were developed to protect the lives of miners.
Effective on June 12, 1967, the standards call for a reduction of ionizing radiation to 1 working level by July 1969 and to a .3 working level 6 months later.
State exposure limits were reduced following issuance of this order under the Public Contracts Act.
In line with the Secretary of Labor's order, the Federal Bureau of Mines is conducting compliance inspections in uranium mines.
By the end of the fiscal year, the Bureau of Mines had made 106 inspections of these mines, finding 84 violating the radiation exposure limits set by the Department.
Action was initiated to bring the violating mines into compliance.
There was other noteworthy progress on the job safety front.
The injury frequency rate in longshoring dropped for the seventh consecutive year since the Department began administering safety and health regulations under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
The longshoring rate dropped 6 percent from 1965 while the shipyard rate fell by 9 percent.
Study and investigations of particularly hazardous operations in these fields resulted in several proposed new regulations.
Mission SAFETY-70, President Johnson's program to reduce injuries to Federal employees 30 percent by 1970, continued to show progress.
A 12.7 percent cut in injuries has brought the Government nearly halfway to its goal.
Since the program was launched in 1965, an estimated 10,000 work injuries have been prevented and nearly $8 million saved in direct costs.
With women playing an increasingly important role in the work force, the Department focused more intently than ever on easing the plight of disadvantaged women workers.
It sought to upgrade household employment to assist disadvantaged women and girls who often turn to this type of work for lack of other skills.
It also provided technical assistance and advice to public and private agencies concerned with equal employment opportunities for women.
Information for use in formulating policy was supplied to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, other Federal agencies, and appropriate agencies in those States with laws relating to sex discrimination.
Amendments to fair employment practice programs in Connecticut, Idaho, Michigan, and Nevada brought to 15 the number of jurisdictions with laws and regulations prohibiting discrimination in employment on the basis of sex.
Efforts to improve the status of women were carried forward by the Interdepartmental Committee and Citizens' Advisory Council on the Status of Women, for which the Department serves as secretariat.
Four task forces of the Advisory Council were appointed to review and update recommendations of the President's Commission on the Status of Women: Family Law and Policy, Health and Welfare, Labor Standards, and Social Insurance and Taxes.
The Department also joined a variety of organizations in sponsoring numerous major conferences dealing with such topics as expanding employment opportunities for women, household employment, the need for day-care facilities, women in poverty, and continuing education for women.
As the U.S. economy has grown larger and more complex, its components have become more interdependent.
It is increasingly more important for labor and management organizations to work together out of mutuality of interest.
Gone forever is the era when a labor dispute could be considered as a problem involving only the two parties; today, a work stoppage in any major industry can have major repercussions throughout the economy.
In 1967, the Department of Labor continued to carry out vital functions in the field of labor-management relations.
It continued to administer important laws and to protect the rights of labor, management, and workers, while encouraging a spirit of cooperation toward achieving our common goal—further economic growth and prosperity for all citizens.
One of the major developments on the industrial relations front was the launching of an early-warning system to pinpoint potential disputes which could affect the national interest.
The Labor Department provided detailed background on collective bargaining issues and positions, along with supplementary status reports, in about 50 different bargaining situations in such key industries as electrical products, communications, oil, trucking, rubber, publishing, meatpacking, shipbuilding, maritime, railroad, airline, and defense products.
The Department also provided support to ad hoc boards established to investigate disputes of national significance and assisted four Presidential Emergency Boards set up under the Railway Labor Act to inquire into major disputes in the railroad and airline industries.
In two instances all of the principal railroads of the Nation were involved.
Other disputes panels receiving the agency's support were the Maritime Pension Study Panel, the President's Missile Sites Labor Commission, and the San Francisco Nurses' Factfinding Panel.
In May 1967, the Teamsters Union asked the Department to oversee the referendum on its newly negotiated national agreement.
Involving more than a quarter-million ballots, the referendum was the largest ever conducted by mail to ratify a collective bargaining contract.
Department officials participated in the counting of the ballots around the clock from the initial preparation to the final verification of results.
The Department continued a long-range study of the longshore industry during the year.
The study is aimed at helping the parties improve the collective bargaining relationship to avoid breakdowns in future negotiations in an industry so vital to the country.
The number of employees represented by labor organizations in the Federal service grew during the year to more than 1 million in over 1,170 bargaining units covered by some 600 agreements.
The Department participated in several Civil Service Commission workshops covering negotiations and implementing labor agreements and programs.
Along with the Commission, the Department reviews agency practices regarding employee representation and recommends new procedures to fit changing conditions.
A primary responsibility of the Department in this field is to nominate arbitrators to rule on problems arising during the establishment of bargaining units in the Federal service.
During the year, the Department was active in administering two laws in the labor-management area—the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) and the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act (WPPDA).
LMRDA requires labor organizations to report for public disclosure their financial activities and regulates certain internal procedures of labor organizations, particularly those dealing with the election of officers and the imposition of trusteeships.
Under certain conditions, employers, labor relations consultants, union officers and employees, and surety companies are subject to the act's reporting provisions.
At year's end, 51,507 disclosures files of reporting labor organizations were active.
To promote voluntary compliance with the law's provisions, the Department gave extensive technical assistance—and information —to labor organizations and others subject to the act.
A total of 125,000 publications on the law's requirements was distributed to those concerned and Department staff members participated in labor affairs events and university-sponsored programs for union members and officials.
Since most violations of the law are either inadvertent or due to misunderstanding, legal action is instituted only when willful violations are indicated.
During the year, approximately 6,400 investigations were completed under the law.
As a result, unions submitted more than 5,000 delinquent financial reports and amended other financial reports to correct deficiencies.
Under LMRDA, 26 civil actions involving the Department were instituted in Federal district courts, 16 civil cases were presented to the courts of appeals for review, and six petitions for writs of certiorari, including two cases involving criminal provisions of the act, were filed in the Supreme Court.
Sixty-nine individuals were indicted under the criminal provisions of LMRDA, leading to 54 convictions and two acquittals.
The WPPDA requires that administrators of welfare or pension benefit plans with 100 or more participants file plan descriptions with the Department of Labor.
It also requires bonding for personnel who are in a position to cause a loss to a plan through fraud or dishonesty.
There are criminal penalties for embezzlement, false reporting, bribery, or kickbacks involving welfare and pension plans.
At the end of the fiscal year, approximately 161,000 active employee-benefit plans were on file with the Department.
The entire listing of reporting plans was revised and updated during the year.
Information had been received and processed for approximately 135,- 000 plans.
Some 33,000 of the 161,000 active plans provided retirement benefits and the remaining 128,000 provided only welfaretype benefits.
To assist all those responsible for filing reports, the Department conducted nearly 130 workshops across the country and distributed 200,000 technical-assistance publications to interested parties.
It also conducted about 900 investigations of delinquent and deficient reporting and financial cases.
Compliance with the law's provisions was effected in these cases primarily through correspondence and by individual contact with the responsible party.
In its efforts during the year to promote the general welfare of American wage earners, the Department mustered new social and economic data.
Surveys were conducted in the slum areas of 10 cities in the continental United States and Puerto Rico to uncover the extent of unemployment and underemployment.
These surveys played a major part in developing concentrated employment programs in various slum areas of the country.
Other studies focusing on manpower policy issues—nonparticipation in the work force, the job situation in slums, and employment and unemployment estimates for specific metropolitan areas—were begun.
These activities are vital in efforts to find work for the disadvantaged.
The Department also published projections of the labor force by color to 1980 and State labor force projections for 1970 and 1980.
In decisionmaking by Government and by private industry, the Department's statistics on manpower programs, the labor force, employment, unemployment, prices, wages, hours of work, productivity, and work stoppages were of crucial importance during the year.
A significant achievement in the field of employment analysis was the development of a monthly hours-and-earnings series representing all 44 million production and nonsupervisory payroll workers in the private nonagricultural economy.
This new series, much more comprehensive than the traditional one for factory production workers, was introduced in May 1967.
The 1968-69 edition of the "Occupational Outlook Handbook," which furnishes information on job opportunities in about 700 occupations and 30 industries, was being readied for publication.
This book, considered a requisite in counseling young people for careers, reevaluates the effects of recent economic, social, and technological developments upon occupational requirements in the U.S.
Several other manpower studies were completed, including manpower projections for health workers, scientists and engineers, and State and local government workers, all of whom are in rapidly growing fields.
National concern about increases in unit labor costs and prices sharpened interest in the measurement and analysis of productivity.
The Department developed a quarterly series of indexes of output per manhour for the private nonfarm sector of the economy.
Progress was made toward the Department's goal of developing indexes of output per manhour for all industries with employment of 50,000 or more.
New indexes were published for the air transportation and the aluminum rolling and drawing industries, while work neared completion for motor vehicles, radio and television, bakery products, foundry, household appliances, and soft-drink industries.
As a part of the agency's effort to analyze and evaluate technological change, a study of "Technology and Manpower in the Textile Industry of the 1970's" was being made.
One of a series on major industries, this study projects the impact of technological change on productivity, employment, occupational requirements, and labormanagement relations.
A summary of developments in the health service industry indicated that manpower shortages will continue over the next decade despite new laborsaving devices and increased efforts to expand the supply of health workers.
As the interest in prices intensified, new attention was directed to the Department's price indexes as barometers of inflationary pressures.
A.major revision of the Wholesale Price Index was carried out during the year.
In addition to a complete reweighting to reflect 1963 shipments of commodities, the index underwent a major reclassification.
A new calculation procedure and machine program was implemented.
More than 200 commodities were added to the index and new preliminary monthly estimates were developed to provide an earlier measure of wholesale price trends.
Beginning with the March 1967 indexes, the Department initiated a new system of jointly releasing the Consumer Price Index and the Wholesale Price Index.
Meanwhile, major work on consumer spending habits was under way.
At the end of the fiscal year, revision of two Department standard budgets that define moderate living standards for a city worker's family of four and a retired couple (at autumn 1966 costs) was nearly completed.
The Department's first survey of wages and related benefits in the hospital industry was completed.
This study, made in connection with the Department's new minimum wage and overtime responsibilities in the area of hospitals, was included in the report to the Congress on minimum wage and maximum hours standards under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Separate reports were also prepared on retail trade and laundries.
The study covered 2 million nonsupervisory workers in government and private hospitals.
Several new types of studies of employee benefit plans were undertaken.
In cooperation with the Internal Revenue Service, the Department has begun to study terminations of pension plans over a 10-year period.
A similar study of profitsharing plans is in progress.
The agency's program of collective bargaining analysis moved into the issues in which seniority is important.
This includes promotion, transfer, layoff, and recall policies.
Data on paid vacations and paid holiday practices in union agreements were issued in 1967.
The Department expanded its listing of contract expiration dates from all agreements covering a minimum of 5,000 workers to those covering at least 1,000 workers.
The most important foreign labor study published by the Department during the year was "Wages in Japan and the United States: Report on the Joint United States-Japan Wage Study."
Reports on labor laws and practice in Brazil, Ethiopia, India, and Lebanon were also published and similar studies for seven other countries were completed.
Among the special studies issued during the year were four on the Soviet Union, covering such areas as labor controls, economic incentives, and worktime required for consumer purchases.
Manpower data collection and analysis and manpower program evaluation are essential for the Department in advising or guiding manpower program administrators, Congressmen, State and local manpower officials, community action groups and educators.
Continued efforts were made to improve statistical reporting on manpower operational programs.
Special reviews and analytical evaluation studies were conducted.
Reports prepared for publication included: (1) A study on earnings mobility of MDTA trainees; (2) a review of training activities under MDTA; and (3) a profile of the changing characteristics of MDTA trainees.
Considerable information was supplied to other agencies concerned with manpower program statistics.
Labor for its review and consideration of federally supported manpower programs in relation to the national antipoverty effort.
A December 1966 survey of applicants in seven cities indicated that lack of training, police records, garnishment records, age, and transportation problems are serious barriers to employment in slum neighborhoods.
Of the 150 major areas classified regularly regarding the adequacy of labor supply, 9 were rated in June 1967 as having substantial unemployment, compared with 13 the year before and 21 two years earlier.
All told, 59 major labor areas were given a low-unemployment rating in June 1967—the same as in 1966 but 19 more than 2 years before.
Pilot surveys of employer job vacancies were carried out in 10 areas by State employment security agencies.
Information obtained included employers' total vacancies, hard-to-fill vacancies, wages offered by occupation, and summer and future job openings.
In the absence of job-vacancy data for all areas, quarterly State employment security agency surveys of unfilled job openings in 77 areas were analyzed by occupation, area, duration, and the reasons why jobs were unfilled for a month or more.
Information was used in matching jobs and jobseekers, counseling, job development, determining shortage occupations for immigrant certification under the Immigration and Nationality Act, and establishing manpower training programs.
The Department's monthly inventory of job openings lists jobs which cannot be filled locally or within a State.
In fiscal 1967, listings increased 12.5 percent from 1966 to more than 578,000.
More than 185,000 of those job openings were filled by employment service offices.
Progress was also made in devising tests for the disadvantaged.
Research in U.S. Employment Service tests included development of tools and techniques for use with the disadvantaged, e.g., a nonreading form of the General Aptitude Test Battery and job readiness achievement tests of basic reading and arithmetic skills.
The research was aimed at tests for "selecting in" the disadvantaged for training and job placement rather than "selecting out."
A contract was signed with the National Urban League to investigate in Pittsburgh and New Orleans the effectiveness of USES tests in job placement of nonwhites and in helping applicants obtain higher-level jobs, and to try out new tools and techniques for use with the disadvantaged.
During fiscal 1967, a series of comprehensive evaluation studies was completed in order to provide administrators of manpower programs with basic information on the progress, results, and direction of manpower programs and recommendations for their further improvement.
Studies completed during the year include a nationwide study of the comparative status of MDTA completers, dropouts, and persons not enrolled at least 1 vear after completion of MDTA programs.
Findings indicated that training under MDTA had a substantially beneficial impact on trainees, compared with those not enrolled—from the standpoints of increasing the rate of employment, reducing both the rate and duration of unemployment, and improving their earnings.
The Department's efforts on behalf of working men and women were not confined to the boundaries of the United States in 1967.
Participation in the negotiations and successful conclusion of the sixth multilateral tariff conference (Kennedy Round) at Geneva, Switzerland.
Participation in the development of a joint policy statement and recommended course of action to improve labor-management relations of U.S. overseas firms.
Co-sponsorship, with the Department of State, of a major conference of U.S. labor attaches in 18 Near East, South Asia, and East Asia countries in New Delhi, India.
Fulfillment, through the AID-sponsored Department of Labor International Technical Assistance Corps (DOLITAC), of 58 technical-assistance assignments in 25 less-developed countries to help them achieve sound economic development within the framework of democratic principles andinstitutions.
Work toward implementing the recommendations of a special manpower mission that visited Vietnam in July 1966.
The mission was headed by a top Department official.
The Department continued to play an active role in the work of the International Labor Organization (ILO), the United Nations (UN), and regional economic organizations.
The U.S. delegation was active in the work of the technical and political committees of the 51st Session of the International Labor Conference.
With 109 countries represented, the Conference adopted a number of conventions and recommendations on technical items consistent with U.S. policy.
These included decisions regarding maximum weight to be carried by one worker, invalidity, old age and survivor's pensions, grievances, and communications between management and workers.
The Department also participated in a number of regional economic and social organizations during 1967.
In the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), it continued to represent the United States in the Manpower and Social Affairs Committee and assisted other Government agencies by providing advisers for U.S. delegates to the Economic Policy Committee, the Scientific and Technical Personnel Committee, and numerous working parties and experts' groups.
The OECD is primarily concerned with finding solutions to internal social and labor problems besetting the 21 most highly developed non-Communist countries.
The Department also took part in the overall administration of the Foreign Service and was represented on the board of examiners, the junior officer selection board, and the annual Foreign Service selection board exercise.
In addition, the Department participated in several cultural exchange programs through the State Department to create greater understanding abroad of the U.S. worker's role in society and to provide officials of foreign labor unions, governments, and other organizations with an opportunity to make on-site studies of the people and institutions of this country.
Through international exhibits, the agency tells the story of the American worker—his way of life, his standard of living, the freedoms he enjoys.
In fiscal 1967, the Department participated in four international fairs, in Zagreb, Yugoslavia; Poznan, Poland; Budapest, Hungary; and Bangkok, Thailand.
In Poland and Yugoslavia, scores of managerial and professional workers attended labor technical seminars conducted by American specialists.
As a Nation marshaled its resources to develop the full potential of all citizens in 1967, the Department strengthened its administrative lines to meet a wide range of social and economic problems.
High priority was given to the continued development of an overall Department management system that would be fully responsive to the governmentwide planning, programing, and budgeting system.
Progress was made toward integrating the management system so that the agency might respond more effectively to the Nation's myriad manpower problems—and attendant social and economic problems.
To provide the Secretary with greater support in the manpower area, the operations and organization of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration were restructured.
The Department's functions of management systems development, program analysis and review, financial systems, and audit were also strengthened.
Most importantly, the year was marked by increased activity toward achieving better cooperation between Federal, State, and local agencies involved in the country's fight against human disadvantage.
The Department also established a research program aimed at identifying the training and education needs of occupations in the manpower field and to forecast the needs for the next decade.
It was not surprising that the agency would look inward and see what action could be taken to open up new job opportunities for its own emplovees.
To carry out the Department's commitment to provide the maximum utilization of its employees, a skills-andinterests survey was made of all nonprofessional workers.
The canvass dealt with promotional opportunities, new careers, and training and educational needs.
The Department also increased its efforts to provide job opportunities at all levels for members of minority groups and the disadvantaged.
Another major development in the personnel area was the signing of a collective bargaining agreement between the Department and the National Council of Field Labor Lodges, American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO.
The agreement covers all nonsupervisory employees in the agency's field service.
Diagrammatic sketches and a tentative drawing of the proposed new Department of Labor Building were endorsed during the year by the Fine Arts Commission, the National Capital Planning Commission, and the Department.
This report catalogs substantial progress in 1967 toward building a society founded on unshakeable social and economic justice.
It provides further evidence that man can, if he only will, shape an order in which everyone has the opportunity to fulfill his or her aspirations and live in self-respect.
The report also focuses on many of the roadblocks still standing in our path to national greatness.
Clearly, one of the challenges facing us is that of continuing the momentum that has gathered in the 6½ years of record economic expansion—an expansion that has pushed unemployment downward and employment, wages, profits, and productivity to new heights.
In 1967, this general economic and social well-being was a source of immense national pride and satisfaction.
But, as each one of us has become acutely aware, a large body of our citizens, concentrated mostly in big-city slums, continue to lead lives darkened by despair and uncertainty.
Our progress has bypassed them.
America cannot fail prosperity's dispossessed.
Let it be said that in our time, we pursued a strategy against poverty so that each man had a chance to be himself.
Let it be said that in our time, we offered him the means to become a free man—for his sake, and for our own."
As we face the future, we have the wealth, energy, and resources to provide every American citizen with maximum opportunity from childhood to old age.
History will decide whether we had the will.