Nineteen sixty-eight was a year, in the Department of Labor, of consolidation of previous gains, of more significant "nonevents" than dramatic incidents, of effort that often exceeded achievement.
The little world of the Department's particular concerns and responsibilities was inevitably affected by the context of a time when the country as a whole lost some of its fantastic forward momentum while it kept its balance against the buffeting winds of more than usual controversy, discord, distemper, and tragedy.
Five tempestuous years of constant change and expansion in the manpower program demanded, for example, that attention be turned more to experience than invention.
The JOBS program—an outgrowth of the “on-the-job training" and"concentrated employment" programs—was one result of this.
The emergence of a clearly indicated structure for a unified Manpower Administration was another.
The historian's broader perspective will be required to assess the significance of 1968's "nonevents": a series of peaceful, private settlements of collective bargaining cases (except in the copper industry and on the east coast and gulf docks) that had previously erupted into "national emergency disputes"; a "cool summer" in the slums and ghettos—following "the long hot summer" of 1967, which had been attributed in large part to joblessness; the total nonuse of Mexican braceros—where there had been 178,000 brought in to work on U.S. farms 4 years before.
The occupational health and safety bill which was urged upon the Congress did not get passed.
Neither did the proposal to extend the protections of the Taft-Hartley Act to those who need it most, especially those who work on farms or for "not-for-profit" organizations.
The efforts to redefine "unemployment" in contemporary terms and to add "social indicators" to the Nation's understanding of what it is doing didn't get very far.
There was only a little gain in establishing a "modern management system" in the Department to help meet the difficulties of public administration.
Creative federalism" was still on the drawing boards.
Yet in each of these cases, and in others, the gains made in 1968 will probably prove to have been of immeasurable importance.
There was particular attention in the Department in 1968 to the first obligation of Government, which is self-government.
There had been the almost sudden ignition.
The Department of Labor had become a full partner for the first time in implementing that purpose.
Consequent pressures on and inside the Department had been met for 2 or 3 years by administrative improvisation.
Now, with the initial impact of new responsibility absorbed, it was time for more basic adjustment in departmental structure and operations.
A good deal was done in 1968 along these lines.
Some more did not get done.
An administrative situation that had become almost frozen is now fluid.
But if the custodians of inertia are in retreat, they have not disbanded.
It is appropriate, under the circumstances, to summarize the instruction which seems to lie in experience—as an informational base from which new architects may proceed as their judgment dictates.
The Department of Labor came to its 50th anniversary—on March 4.
1963—more a captive than an heir of its history.
It had never gotten rid of the bar sinister which President Taft put on its escutcheon when he reluctantly signed the bill creating the Department—in the early morning hours of the day he left office.
He protested strongly— without distinguishing the comparable situations of the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Commerce—the idea of having in the Government a separate department representing what he called the"special interests" of labor.
That prejudice persisted over the years, so that as successive major"labor" programs developed most of them were placed for administration outside the Department of Labor.
Labor remained by far the smallest among the Cabinet departments.
Various bureaus were moved in and out of it, their personnel scattered around in 20 or more buildings in Washington and in a widely divergent pattern of regional offices across the country.
The comparative recency of acrimonious controversy about whether some of these bureaus would permit their telephone calls to be handled through the Department switchboard illustrates how much and how long the Department of Labor remained hardly more than a looseknit confederation of agencies.
That attitude and situation began to change in the late 1950's.
The change accelerated in the early 1960's.
Although there are still significant residues of it, there is every reason in recent experience to conclude that nothing stands today between the Department of Labor and its maturity except its own sloughing off of institutional habits and attitudes traceable in large part to a half century of orphanage—or being an unwanted child—in the family of Federal departments.
The self-analysis which proceeded in the Department in 1968 was tougher minded and more pragmatic than this introduction to it may suggest.
It was not dominated by sensitivities about the past, or by any regard for institutional status as an end in itself.
It proceeded rather from the clearest possible identification of the human purposes the Department can best serve.
First.
The identification of a single unifying sense of departmental purpose—to see to it that every American has a full and equal opportunity to earn a decent living—dictates a responsive realignment and consolidation of departmental units.
Second.
There has to be a strong central executive authority in the Department.
Third.
Having qualified itself to share significantly in administering the present, the Department's responsibility now is to enlarge its capacity to help invent the future.
A Secretary's directive, issued on October 21, 1968, and included in appendix A to this report, reflects the instruction those who have been principal stewards of the Department's affairs draw from their experience.
The implementation of the directive was postponed, at the direction of the President, first to permit further consultation with State representatives, and then—after the November election—in recognition of the propriety and the potential advantage of leaving the completion of this undertaking, or its redirection, to a new administration.
That directive reflects the now fully recognized desirability and necessity of administering the employment and training functions of the Department through a unified Manpower Administration.
A meeting on December 9, 1968, with State representatives revealed that the remaining objections to the announced unification of the Manpower Administration go more to form than substance.
To say more here would be to risk prejudice to the necessary efforts of a new administration to proceed in this area.
The"labor standards" and "labor-management service"functions of the Department have traditionally been handled separately.
Review and analysis of the reasons for this, and the consequences, have led to the conclusion that these functions should be brought within a single Labor-Management Services and Standards Administration.
This would eliminate such anomalies as the previous handling of most (but not all) Fair Labor Standards Act functions outside the Labor Standards Administration.
It would better reflect the fact that employment standards evolve today through an interplay of collective bargaining and legislative forces.
It would permit economies in supplying various administrative services, and would simplify the pattern of relationships between Department of Labor and State agencies.
A time characterized by kaleidoscopic change has found the forces within the Department for the formulation, development, and advancement of new policy and programs seriously scattered.
Research, much of it interrelated, has been done independently in the past in the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the manpower and the labormanagement and labor standards units.
Yet the principal policy planning unit is in the Secretary's office.
Recognition of the essential importance of developing a"new national will" as the basis for new programs raises question about the relegation of the Office of Information, Publications and Reports to a separate function of reporting principally on what is already being done.
Fuller realization of the pragmatics of legislative innovation—and of the value of melding new ideas with the stagnant political realities—leads to stimulating conjecture about the potential that lies in bringing the "policy planners" and the "legislative officers" into closer working cooperation.
The October 21 Directive points, accordingly, toward making policy development a major departmental unit—with the realization that further inquiry and experience along these lines will be necessary.
The executive branch of the Federal Government is actually two governments—one political, the other professional—often separate, invariably unequal.
The convenient explanation that political appointees are responsible for"policymaking," and career service personnel for"operations," satisfies only strangers to both.
These are inseparable functions.
Some of the details of these conclusions and some of the steps taken—or initiated—to meet them are appropriately noted here.
Earlier doubts and disagreements about whether Assistant Secretaries in the Department should exercise "line" authority or "staff" functions have been resolved in recent practice by an almost complete identification of their"line" responsibility.
This has strengthened the Department greatly.
It means much fuller participation by political officers in carrying out the Department's responsibilities.
The alternative—of having a large number of bureau heads "reporting directly to the Secretary"—may offer an illusory prestige advantage and some help in writing job descriptions.
But what it means in fact, given the other demands on the time of the Secretary and Under Secretary, is a minimum of either the surveillance or the assistance by political officers which is necessary to the necessarily innovative functioning of the bureaus.
The obvious point that the advisability of this identification of "line responsibility" depends on the people involved is better made in connection with the selection of that personnel.
There is good reason to consider putting all of these units except the Solicitor's Office into the pattern of Assistant Secretary responsibility and authority.
Enlarging the line responsibilities of the Assistant Secretaries has brought into sharp relief the necessity of their having authority, and the means to exercise authority, commensurate with those responsibilities.
Schedule C" positions are key links between the political and the career governments. Those who occupy these positions have to be wholly responsive to the political officers, and must serve in fact as well as in concept, "at the pleasure" of those officers.
This special and necessary vulnerability makes very doubtful both the fairness and the wisdom of the recent decision of the Civil Service Commission restricting the severance pay rights of Schedule C position holders.
The complications and delays which frequently attend the filling of "supergrade" vacancies constitute a severe drag on the exercise of responsibility in the Department.
Meetings during 1968 between top officers of the Department and the Civil Service Commission suggested strongly that staff practices in both the Department and the Commission were doubling what ought to be the time required to fill such vacancies.
These practices have been only partly corrected.
Serious question remains about the extension to the higher civil service grades of the promotional rules and practices under the collective bargaining agreement with Local 12 of the American Federation of Government Employees.
The political officers in the Department have felt constrained not to press their views on this fully, conscious of the tendency of those with "labor backgrounds" to overreact when they find themselves on the employer side of a collective bargaining relationship.
There is strong feeling, nevertheless, that this situation has not been satisfactorily met so far and that a more constructive approach to it ought to be and can be worked out.
Communication" is an obviously critical element in the operation of a two-government system and in the exercise of an effective central authority.
It is not peculiar to the Department of Labor, however, that this element has been little recognized, and less developed.
With all of their disadvantages, carefully planned meetings (small enough to encourage dialogue) are better.
The vitalization of the Department Management Committee through the Under Secretary's active participation in its weekly sessions illustrates this.
A substantial (but not sufficient) increase in visits by the political officers of the Department to regional offices has confirmed the considerable potential value of such efforts.
The Manpower Administrator's initiation of frequent conference calls to all field offices has been effective.
Various efforts to develop a flow of ideas and suggestions up the lines have been largely unsuccessful.
The prevailing notion is still that what is asked for will be supplied, but that volunteering anything is not worthwhile.
Attempts by the Secretary's office to draw on the ideas incubating in the Bureau of Labor Statistics and in the research unit in the Manpower Administration are still disappointing, A first staff draft of testimony for a congressional committee hearing is characteristically sterile.
Reports of successful operational efforts come readily, but reports of difficulties and failures at a crawl.
There has been a lack of confidence: self-confidence on the one hand, confidence in those "above" on the other.
Better to be quiet, the attitude had become, than to risk being wrong.
Written communication in the Department suffers seriously from arthritis complicated by delegation.
When most of what is written is prepared by someone other than the signer the writer assumes only ersatz responsibility.
He says the least that is required.
Most sentences are long.
Three or four ideas are loaded in to increase the odds that one will be impressive and that if another is wrong it will get lost.
Paragraphs are built like sandwiches, the meat in the middle.
The purpose is less to say what is right than to avoid saying anything wrong.
Then somebody initials the document at the end of the day, somebody else at the end of another, somebody else at the end of the next . . . so that everybody can go home with the inflating illusion that an empty "In" box is the mark of an executive.
The Department's effectiveness would be doubled if its prose were cut in half, if those who initialed documents read them, and if those who signed them wrote some of them.
In none of this is the Department of Labor in any way exceptional.
There has been active pressure within the Department the last 3 or 4 years to develop a "modern management system," permitting an objective measurement of work performance.
Quite a lot of progress in this direction leaves a good deal more required.
Such a system is resisted by political executives as another restraint on their instinct for management and by those "down the line" as a checkup on their performance.
The executives' reaction is wrong.
Such a system, properly conceived of and administered, can be an indispensable means of strengthening the executive function.
Similarly of "cost effectiveness analysis"—which has a limited but nevertheless significant utility in human resource development programs.
A final point in the consideration of methods of increasing departmental effectiveness and the role of the political executive may seem small, petty, bureaucratic.
It isn't.
Things work best if any significant issue arising in the course of interdepartmental relations is referred to the political officers of the Department.
The "two governments" operate not only in the Department of Labor but throughout the executive branch.
It is a necessary axiom of their effective operation that there be no short circuiting of authority at the nonpolitical level; for there is no commensurate distributing of responsibility if things go wrong.
The Department has established itself now as a major operational instrument of the Federal Executive.
It continues in a minor role, however, so far as the development of national—and Administration— policy is concerned.
Key factors in this situation lie outside the appropriate area of this report.
These would include questions, among others, regarding the desirable degree of separation between the domestic and international councils of Government, the possibilities of closer ties between the domestic departments, concepts of administration reflected in the respective roles of Cabinet officers and White House staff agencies, even the relative regard for fiscal and monetary policies as compared with others.
These matters are not noted in criticism of present practices, but rather in recognition of the broad considerations which are involved here.
What is appropriate is to mark clearly here the present limitations on the Department's capacity to contribute substantially to broad policy formulation.
These limitations result particularly from the traditional scattering, already noted.
The establishment of a strong central Policy and Program Development unit is an almost essential prerequisite to the assertion of any particular departmental competence in the broad policymaking area.
Freeing the Secretary of Labor from any except the most infrequent participation in particular labor disputes is essential to the development of any significant role for him in the effective economic councils of the Administration.
This has been substantially accomplished in 1968.
The Department's relationships with organized labor used to be considered an inhibiting factor so far as its participation in broad Government policy was concerned, and some residue of this attitude remains.
This is wrong.
American labor's position on education, housing, civil rights, health, international policy, and in a dozen comparable areas is a much more significant factor in contemporary American history than its position on the repeal of section 14(b) of the Taft-Hartley Act.
The effective administration of the Department would make it a vital agency for bringing into Administration councils the force of organized labor's responsible and constructive advice, criticism, and support.
It suggests the effectiveness of efforts in the Department to eliminate the results of earlier racial discrimination to note that the percentage of Negro employees in the higher grades in the Department was almost twice as high, in 1968, as the comparable percentage in any other major department or agency in the Government.
Other measurements show similar results.
A new career route providing opportunities for clerical employees to advance to professional positions was established in 1968 in recognition of the fact that old habits of discrimination had made this transition particularly difficult.
It is rapidly developing in the Department, except in a few bureau offices in a few field areas, that race is being eliminated as a factor even in the consciousness of the people who are the Department of Labor.
Mexican-Americans were placed in equal employment opportunity program positions in the Southwest to improve communications and develop recruiting resources among this group of citizens.
Comparable efforts to assure"equal opportunity" for women in the Department—and to take advantage of their "equal competence"—have been comparatively successful; but this had been substantially accomplished before.
Attempts during the year at direct attack on the problem of underutilization of younger people in the Department showed fewer results.
Establishing a policy, for example, of no new appointments (without special approval) of anyone over 35 to Department advisory committees (until a better balance can be achieved) resulted principally in a number of vacancies being left unfilled.
There is considerably more promise in the experimental efforts undertaken in 1968 in cooperation with the management interns in the Department, resulting in their establishment of the Coalition for Youth Action.
The necessary conclusion at the year's end, however, was that the Department (like the Government as a whole) has not yet found the significantly new ways that are necessary to attract top-flight college graduates in substantial numbers.
This could be the single most ominous long-range problem in Government administration today— particularly in view of American youth's prevalent (and increasing) attitude toward "the establishment"—and the good reason for that attitude.
The Department provided during the year, as an employer, training and developmental opportunities for almost 500 disadvantaged persons.
A program for the rehabilitation of alcoholics, unique in the Government, was established as part of the mental health services available to Department employees.
A consumer education and debt counseling service for employees was also instituted.
Through active participation in the work of the Joint Administrative Task Force, an interagency group of administrative specialists working under the direction of the White House staff, major reductions in the processing time for Federal grants and a simplification of the procedures involved in handling these grants were achieved.
The development of a consolidated application system for the Pilot Neighborhood Center Program permits a local government agency to combine into one application its requests for funds under 28 Federal grant programs administered by four departments and agencies—Labor; Health, Education and Welfare; Housing and Urban Development; and the Office of Economic Opportunity.
To support the Department's management system, a cost accounting system to provide timely accounting reports and associated data was designed and installed.
This integrated accounting system will provide a fiscal basis for making more effective decisions and for improving the evaluation of progress toward the Department's goals and program objectives.
The management improvement and cost reduction programs resulted in savings in 1968 of approximately $3.6 million.
The reason for so much attention in this report to the internal administration of the Department's affairs is this: An extraordinary continuity among the political officers in the Department has provided unusual opportunity for their assessment of actual experience.
They have improved upon this opportunity, responding particularly to the guidance of an Assistant Secretary for Administration who combines a good many years of career service with a proven competence for executive responsibility.
Many of the conclusions drawn from this review of experience have been implemented in 1968.
There hasn't been time for the completion of other proposed improvements; and there are a number of other areas in which needs have been identified but the ways to meet them still have to be worked out.
Putting the reins now in other hands—with full confidence—there is the desire to report fully on the lessons of effort, achievement, and error alike.
Public concern about labor relations and collective bargaining has centered traditionally on "national emergency disputes" in major industries.
That concern shifted sharply and significantly in 1968 to 'strikes of public employees"—especially school teachers, sanitation workers, firemen,.
Only two "national" cases developed in 1968.
The facilities of the four major copper companies were closed by strikes in mid-1967 when collective bargaining failed to produce agreement.
The shutdowns continued the rest of that year, but no supply crisis warranting resort to the Taft-Hartley Act procedures developed; settlements were reached in negotiations directed by the President and conducted by top Federal officials in March and April 1968.
The east coast and gulf longshore contracts expired on October 1, 1968.
There was a brief strike and a Taft-Hartley injunction was obtained.
No agreement was reached during the 80-day period; the strike resumed on December 20 and was still in effect at the end of the year.
Settlements were reached, however, without Government participation and in general without strikes, in the steel, aerospace, telephone, coal, can aluminum, and other major industries.
A year that had been expected to produce an unusual number of critical bargaining stalemates and crises of "Government intervention" afforded, instead, substantial encouragement that private collective bargaining between "big industry" and 'big labor" has achieved a significant maturity. There was significance, too, in the country's "keeping its cool" through a 10-month copper strike, and in the fact that resumption of the dock strike in December attracted comparatively little public notice.
There was also reason to reflect that it has been necessary to invoke the Taft-Hartley Act only six times now in 5 years (four times in special defense production situations, twice in the east coast and gulf dock disputes), and that the use of the Railway Labor Act emergency procedures has dropped to a third of its previous frequency.
This is not to suggest that the problem of "national emergency disputes" has worked itself out in the United States, so that it may be crossed off the national agenda of concern.
There is, though, good reason to take new inventory of the elements in this situation, particularly of the changing factor of public reaction—which has always been a larger element than was fully recognized in determining how much of a crisis had developed.
The newer problem of disputes between local government agencies and their employees lies outside Federal authority or jurisdiction, at least under present statutes.
The Under Secretary did participate, at the President's request and with the agreement of the parties, in the Memphis sanitation workers' dispute.
It appears likely, furthermore, that the spreading intensity of this problem will lead to one form or another of Department participation in the attempt to find ways to meet it.
But this is not a matter for report here.
The matter of Federal employment relations is, however, one of vital concern to the Department.
The President appointed an interagency committee in 1967 to review the operation of Executive Order 10988 (in effect since 1962) and to make recommendations for modification of that order.
The committee, chaired by the Secretary of Labor, included the Secretary of Defense, the Postmaster General, the Commissioner of the Civil Service Commission (vice chairman of the committee), the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, and a Special Assistant to the President.
Extensive public hearings were held, and the advice of a distinguished advisory panel of experts from outside the Government obtained.
Extensive staff work and consultation with the panel resulted in the preparation of a draft committee report which was endorsed by the advisory panel.
The draft was concurred in fully by a majority of the committee members, and tentatively by representatives of the others.
A series of developments (including changes in the membership of the committee) precluded either final agreement on the draft report or any transmittal to the President.
This draft report is included here as appendix B. This document has no official status.
It is set out because it reflects the serious and responsible contributions of a wide variety of informed people to a subject of vital national concern.
It will be of considerable value as a point of further departure in taking whatever action is necessary, in whatever form, to maintain employment relationships in the Federal Government on what has so far been an almost model basis.
Beyond that, there are proposals here which are at least relevant to the subject of public employment relationships at the local government level.
It is desirable, furthermore, to set out in full a report which has been the subject of a good deal of piecemeal and often inaccurate rumor.
Although the Department's direct participation in major collective bargaining cases was less in 1968 than in previous years, certain supportive functions in the area increased.
These included making a factfinding study of the skilled-craftsmen-wage-compression problem on the railroads (as part of the resolution of the 1967 dispute), assisting various boards and commissions which had been set up in particular cases, maintaining an "early warning"system covering major collective bargaining situations, and continuing the review and analyses of legislative proposals in the collective bargaining area.
The administration of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) and the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act (WPPDA) proceeded, in 1968, in an orderly and comparatively normal fashion.
By the end of the 1968 fiscal year, 51,656 disclosure files of reporting labor organizations under the LMRDA were active.
Approximately 3,000 investigations were completed under the law.
Thirty-three civil actions involving the Department were instituted under the act in Federal district courts.
The Supreme Court held in a series of three cases that the Secretary of Labor's role in the enforcement of the act's provisions is one of protecting the public interest.
3) Where it disqualified 95 percent of them, the exclusion of candidates from the ballot is sufficient to prove that the violation "may have affected the outcome" of the election.
By the end of fiscal 1968, approximately 157,700 active employeebenefit plans were on file with the Department under the WPPDA.
About 1,400 investigations of delinquent and deficient reportings cases were conducted during the year.
Continuing efforts in the Department to obtain legislative attention to serious problems relating to welfare and pension plans—with respect to the fiduciary responsibilities involved and with regard to funding and vesting—were again, in 1968, unsuccessful.
There continues to be strong business opposition to the vesting and funding measures, and the labor position is divided.
No formal administration position has been taken, despite widespread concern among several of the departments and agencies with responsibilities in this area.
A unanimous Advisory Council recommendation has now been made with respect to standards of fiduciary responsibility, and progress in their area seems assured.
A sharp increase in separation from the Armed Forces, from 600,000 in 1967 to 840,000 in 1968, led to an expansion of the Department's reemployment rights responsibilities to returning veterans.
This was reflected in a complaint case increase of 96 percent over the year from 1,565 to 3,066.
Some 65 percent of the 566,413 veterans completing referral forms indicated preservice employment.
Eligibility for reemployment rights under the Military Selective Service Act appeared to be met by 250,540 veterans, who had been employed in private industry.
The Defense Department and the Department of Labor agreed to have all servicemen complete the reemployment rights and employment data form under the referral system developed by the Labor Department in 1957.
Copies of the forms were also made available to the Veterans' Administration so that the agency might contact those veterans with less than a high school education and encourage them to pursue their educational goals under the G.I. Bill.
In Eager et al. v. Magma Copper Company, the Supreme Court expanded its previous rulings in the area of fringe benefits for veterans by upholding the veteran's claims for certain vacation and holiday pay.
The publication of the 1969 Manpower Report makes any detailing of the record in this area unnecessary here.
What counts is that the national unemployment rate, which was 6.6 percent in December 1960, has been cut exactly in half as of December 1968.
This improvement is substantially larger among members of minority groups (where unemployment was most severe 8 years ago).
During this period, the number of people at work in this country has increased by over 11 million.
Both elements have been critically important.
It suffices to note here that some three million people most of them "disadvantaged" in one way or another—have been directly affected since 1963 by employment or work-training programs developed (and in most cases financed) by the Department of Labor.
The comparable number 8 years ago was zero.
The story in the Manpower Report is of the literally fantastic building, in a matter of months, of a huge enterprise whose product is millions of trained, qualified, employable people.
That report sets out plainly, too, the companion facts of frustration and failureand of still almost frantic effort to keep up with the exploding expectations which come from the very act of doing what was for so long not done.
Just one point is appropriately emphasized here.
It relates to both the "economic growth" and the "manpower program" elements in the employment record of the past 8 years.
But it looks to the future.
This country is playing today with the dynamite notion that it will "risk a little increased unemployment" in order to"cure inflation."
That won't work.
What may appear to be argument is nevertheless included in this report because the record of how unemployment has been reduced discloses one key fact: Whatever success there has been in getting the "hard core unemployed" into jobs has resulted essentially from there being jobs these people could go into without displacing other people.
If "cooling off the economy"means—and it does—that the economy would be slowed down so that a quarter of a million to a million people would have to be laid off, there would be just two possibilities.
One would be that several hundred thousand people who were the "hard core disadvantaged" would be put out of work.
The other would be that several hundred thousand people who would otherwise be employed would be laid off to protect the employment of the "hard core disadvantaged" group.
It is clear from the record that neither group would take it.
The process which has been developed to provide work opportunity for people previously denied it—in large measure because of their race, or because of the disadvantages resulting from their race—is not reversible.
Trying to reverse it would deny, in the slums and the ghettos, expectations that have now ripened into actual opportunity— and will not be denied again.
Or it would mean placing the burden of unemployment on the next higher (but still almost marginal) group of workers—who are already close to resentment about the special attention that has been given the "hard core disadvantaged" and have tolerated it at all only because it has not actually resulted (despite their fears) in their losing their own jobs.
The "trade-off" idea—that inflation can be traded off for some unemployment—may satisfy economic theory.
It ignores social reality.
This is not the place to address the ethics of an affluent people deciding that the cost of meeting inflation is to be placed on those least able to bear that cost.
It is the place to report that the measures by which unemployment has been reduced among those who are poor and those who are black are—for better (as seems correct) or worse— measures which will make any significant increase in unemployment not just a misfortune but a disaster.
There is a general assumption that unemployment insurance will lessen the impact of increased joblessness enough to make it tolerable.
It will not.
The Manpower Report also covers the Department's administration in 1968 of the unemployment insurance program, so that here again the inclusion of details in this annual report would be pointless.
The central facts are that some 4.6 million workers received $2.2 billion in unemployment benefits in 1968.
The average weekly payment was $42.10.
The inadequacies of the present unemployment insurance system were pressed on the Congress in 1965 and 1966.
No effective action was taken.
The short of it is that today's Federal-State unemployment insurance system is essentially the same as it was when it was adopted in 1935.
There has been no congressional updating even of the wage base ($3,000).
The system has been weakened in administrative practice.
The system will not in its present form cover the impact of any large scale increase in unemployment sufficiently to meet the forces which have been noted.
A brief report is included here (because the Manpower Report does not cover it) on the six Federal workmen's compensation laws administered by the Department.
These six laws protect some 4.5 million workers in the event of a work injury.
Those covered include civilian employees of the U.S. Government, the District of Columbia Government, the Canal Zone Government, the Panama Canal Company; such groups as Peace Corps volunteers, enrollees in the Job Corps, and members of the Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA); longshore and harbor workers; and employees of private industry in the District of Columbia.
Statutory coverage was extended in April 1968 to State and local law enforcement officers killed or injured while apprehending persons suspected of committing crimes against the United States, or attempting to prevent the commission of such crimes.
A total of 125,341 injuries were reported in fiscal 1968 under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, an increase of 4,019 over the previous year.
Most of the increase is attributable to the liberalization of benefits which became effective during fiscal 1967.
Total injuries reported during fiscal 1968 under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and its extensions were 94,578, a decrease of 6,319 from fiscal 1967.
Injuries reported under the District of Columbia Compensation Act totaled 28,579—down by 913 from the previous year.
The Employees' Compensation Appeals Board began the fiscal year with 88 cases: 217 new appeals were docketed and 262 cases closed, leaving 43 cases pending at the end of fiscal 1968.
The average time lapse from the date of filing an appeal to the date of closing was 4.5 months.
Department activities during 1968 in administering the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) are covered in a separate report to the Congress, and are accordingly not covered here.
It could well prove, in retrospect, the Department's most enduring activity in 1968 that there was strong emphasis placed on the protection of working people's physical safety and health.
The President included a major proposal for a new Occupational Safety and Health Act in his January 1968 Manpower Message to the Congress.
The false issue of "interference with States rights" was raised against the bill—largely by those who oppose comparable efforts at the State level with equal vigor.
The proposal was left lying in the House and Senate committees while the worker casualty lists continued at a higher rate than those in Vietnam: seven workers killed on the job every hour of the workweek (14,500 during the year); a thousand disabled (two million a year) so that they had to leave work—many never to return: with unknown additional numbers being exposed to occupational disease.
The country was still unaware, at the end of the year, of the hidden price tag, in human life and suffering, that attaches to what it buys.
But that consciousness was stirring.
Despite the Congress' inaction there were clear signs that a return to this effort in the immediate future will produce a different result.
The Department invoked its safety authority under the Walsh-Healey Act to achieve significant immediate results in the protection of uranium miners against the hazards of radiation and consequent lung cancer.
A division of responsibility regarding this danger—among several Federal agencies, and as between State and Federal authorities—had permitted a continued unconscionable disregard of it.
A hearing set by the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy and the coincident emergence of a Department of Health, Education and Welfare report and considerable attendant attention in the press prompted the Department's setting of strict radiation exposure standards to be observed by Government contractors.
This had a catalytic effect on the whole subject, as well as the immediate effect of closing the mines in which this problem was most serious and the taking of safety measures—substantially reducing the radiation exposure—in others.
This matter, too, was only partly covered by action taken in 1968, however, and remains on the active agenda.
The interest taken in the uranium mining situation during 1968 extended to a renewal of concern about the health and safety situation in other types of mines.
The Department's authority in this area is narrow under present statutes, has been restricted even more in operational practice, and is prospectively restrained still further under the Federal Metallic and Nonmetallic Mine Safety Act of 1966.
This situation is not satisfactory, and warrants early action.
The Department also developed regulatory guides for the safety certification of dockside cranes used in maritime employment.
A requirement that shipyards ascertain the means of protection against the hazards of all chemical products before using them went into effect.
Hearings were held on a number of amendments to the longshoring regulations, including the requirements for special handling of hazardous commodities.
Attention was given for the first time in a number of years to the '"hazardous occupation" standards which are maintained by the Department under the child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Extension of the coverage of the act to agricultural labor necessitated the issuance of a standard in this area.
There were also some changes made in the standards regarding the employment of 16- to 17-year-olds as helpers on motor vehicles and on work involving the use of automatic elevators.
This was done as part of an effort to increase youth employment opportunities wherever this is possible without endangering their health or safety.
A related issue developed when the extension of the coverage of the FLSA to certain State and local employees brought into issue the propriety of the practice in 16 States of employing 17- and 18-year-olds to drive school buses—a practice involving about 12,000 such drivers.
An uneasy decision was reached not to disrupt this established practice.
A number of efforts, including several research projects, working conditions studies, and conferences on the quality of work and job satisfaction, have been initiated this year; all in the interest of defining a meaningful agenda for action—action to realize that broader dimension of the wage earner's welfare.
The President's “Mission Safety-70" program to reduce injuries to Federal employees by some 30 percent by 1970 continued to receive emphasis.
Since the program was launched in 1965, an estimated 11,000 work injuries have been prevented and $8.6 million saved in direct costs.
There has been an 8 percent reduction in injuries since this program was initiated.
The Department has actively encouraged the individual States to adopt their own legislation affecting the well-being of the American worker.
There were approximately 1,900 such bills introduced in 1968 in the legislatures of 25 States, and about 200 measures enacted.
Major new or revised safety legislation included a comprehensive industrial safety law in Vermont; the creation of a Division of Safety in Arizona and a Division of Safety Engineering and Education in Maryland; and a radiation control law in Delaware.
New York broke new ground in an area in which legislative standards are long overdue by creating an advisory council on farm labor safety to study and investigate job safety problems of farmworkers.
Six other States enacted various types of provisions contributing to the health and safety of workers.
Two enforceable antidiscrimination laws were enacted, one against racial discrimination in Oklahoma, the other against age discrimination in Maryland.
Arkansas enacted a modern minimum wage law.
The Territory of Guam made major improvements in its minimum wage statutes.
New York extended the coverage and benefits of its minimum wage law.
Other wage enactments included a prevailing wage law in Louisiana, and protection of men as well as women under California's equal pay law.
New regulations were prepared and issued governing the administration of the Federal contract compliance program.
For the first time under the program, notices of proposed debarment were issued—to five major companies, against whom charges of racial discrimination had been filed.
Also for the first time, definitive affirmative action programs were established in federally financed construction projects (in Philadelphia and Cleveland).
As increasing numbers of mature women sought employment, the Department stressed programs to stimulate interest in their counseling, placement, and training.
The Department furnished technical assistance and information to colleges and universities interested in establishing continuing education programs for women, and those interested in establishing counseling and education programs for women.
Much of the Department's activity concerning women involved encouraging new or improved State legislation regarding minimum wage protection, inadequate minimum wage standards, limited premium pay protection, inflexible hours limitation, and weightlifting problems.
The Department also provided technical assistance on tax and retirement programs, legislation affecting women's voting rights and their eligibility to run for public office, and welfare legislation designed to encourage the utilization of women in the labor force.
There was notable emphasis on social economics in the Department's 1968 research programs.
Interest in the social forces affecting manpower was focused primarily on the Nation's Negro population.
A publication entitled "Social and Economic Conditions Affecting Negroes in the United States" was compiled jointly with the Census Bureau and released.
In cooperation with several other governmental agencies, models and analyses of the labor force, productivity, and wage-price elements in a post-Vietnam economy were prepared.
A new, comprehensive data collection system was launched in the slums of six large cities, designed to measure in depth the job problems and barriers to employment of slum area residents.
The surveys will yield information on barriers to employment, problems associated with looking for work, migration patterns, participation in manpower programs, job location, and attitudes and motivation toward work.
A survey was made on the job plans of men 20 to 64 years of age who, during the year, were not in the labor force.
The results indicated that poor health is the principal factor preventing men in the prime working ages from seeking work.)
Monthly surveys of current job opportunities were initiated in two metropolitan areas in late 1967, permitting some industryby-industry estimates of opportunities.
Development of a new program of occupational employment statistics continued.
Research was completed on a study which provides local manpower analysts with a method of utilizing national manpower information in developing their own projections.
A new quarterly series of indexes on output per man-hour, hourly compensation, and unit labor costs was published, and work was started on the development of a single index of productivity based on man-hours worked.
As part of the Department's effort to analyze and evaluate the impact of technological change, a study of"Technology and Manpower in the Textile Industry of the 1970's" was completed.
One of a series of reports on the major industries in our economy, the study projected the impact of technological change on such areas as productivity, employment, occupational requirements, and labor-management relations.
As the computer came into increased use, work was begun on making the Wholesale Price Index, the Industry-Sector Price Index, the Consumer Price Index, and Industry Growth Data a part of the computerized labor statistics information system.
A major accomplishment during the year was the publication of the standard household budgets for differing family and rural or urban situations.
A significant advance was made in measuring employee compensation per hour of work in the total private nonagricultural economy.
The Department also undertook sampling work and provided technical advice on estimation procedures for the new Coordinated Federal Wage System, whereby pay scales for all blue-collar Federal workers will be based on a single annual wage survey in each affected area operated by a designated local wage board.
Through the Department of Labor International Technical Assistance Corps (DOLITAC), significant technical programs were carried out during the fiscal year under the auspices of the Agency for International Development (AID) in Brazil, Panama, Central America, Bolivia, Guyana, Morocco, Tunisia, Thailand, Korea, India, Okinawa, Vietnam, and Turkey.
New cooperative relationships were arranged between the Department and the International Labor Organization (ILO) under which an increasing number of Americans became involved in ILO technical assistance projects in developing countries.
The Department participated in a broad-scale review of U.S. international trade policy.
Particular emphasis was placed on several problem areas, including the impact of increased imports on domestic employment and manpower policy, the development of a viable adjustment assistance program, the maintenance of the Long-Term Cotton Textile Agreement, special problems relating to the proposed industrialization along the U.S.-Mexican border, and the question of non-tariff barriers to the flow of trade.
The Assistant Secretary of Labor for International Affairs was elected Chairman of the Governing Body of the International Labor Organization for a 1-year term.
The Deputy Assistant Secretary led the U.S. delegation to a meeting of the Permanent Technical Committee (under the Organization of American States) on Labor Matters in San Salvador.
Training and cultural exchange programs in labor and manpower areas were arranged for by the Department for some 645 foreign nationals visiting the United States under the sponsorship of the Agency for International Development, the Department of State, the United Nations, and other national organizations.
Eight labor exhibits were assembled and displayed during fiscal 1968 for the U.S. Information Agency.
Uruguay; Lima, Peru; Izmir, Turkey; Nairobi, Kenya; Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania; Zagreb, Yugoslavia; Budapest, Hungary; and Poznan, Poland.
This is a report for 1968.
But there is better perspective in looking back over a little longer period—and particular occasion now for summary in terms of the last 5 years.
The meaning and measure of the Department of Labor from 1963 to 1968 will be in whatever happened then to "the welfare of the wage earners of the United States."
The men and women who were the Department during that little cross section of time knew and respected the critical priority of human purpose over any institutional interest or pride.
People—"wage earners" (which is most of us)—were kept in clear, orienting focus, unobscured by any narrower or more immediate programmatic ends.
This meant taking only limited satisfaction in the setting during this period, year after year and often month by month, of new records of wage earner welfare—as measured in tradition's terms.
Eight million more people were at work at the end of the period than at its start.
Despite an unprecedented increase in the number seeking work (more young Americans came of working age in 1965 and 1966 alone than in the entire decade of the 1950's), unemployment was reduced from 5.5 percent (December 1963) to 3.3 percent (December 1968).
The unemployment rate for adult men, heads of families, was pushed down below 2 percent.
The number of major labor areas in which unemployment exceeded 6 percent was cut from 38 to 6, the number of long-term unemployed people (out of work more than 26 weeks) from 493,000 to 152,000.
Workers' earnings—in terms of hourly rates or weekly takehome, by gross or "real" measure, on an aggregate or per capita basis—went to new highs, and then higher and higher.
But viewing the record of the Department in these traditional terms would both imply too much about its part in the setting of these records (for this was a period of constant expansion of the economy, of strengthened private collective bargaining, of congressional and Presidential effectiveness of an extraordinarily high order) and say at the same time too little about the exercise of responsibility and pursuit of purpose within the Department.
These statistics reflect a nationwide averaging of successes and failures; so they conceal the remaining condition of those at the bottom.
These statistics tell the economists what they need to know about the working of the system and provide balm for the ego of administrators but they report only implicitly and incompletely on the human condition.
Their worst defect is that they encourage taking satisfaction from current accomplishment if it was better than past performance—without enough inquiring whether that past had validity as a base for comparison.
The real point of these 5 years was that the magnitude of achievement was so great that it wakened America out of its deterministic subservience to "outside forces" into the realization that the human and national competence includes the ability to do just about whatever it is decided to do.
With this wakening, previous achievement was reduced to minor operational relevance.
The standard for measuring accomplishment became the human potential itself.
How far we had come became irrelevant in the new realization of how far we could go.
The 1963-68 gains in terms of traditional measurement—numbers employed, the degree of their security, the amounts of their earnings— were probably less important to the future than the fact that this was when the opportunity to work, to earn a decent living, was finally identified and significantly recognized as a matter of right—human, individual rights.
The President and the Congress established the rule of law that race and religion and sex are to have nothing to do with the enjoyment of the right to a job, including its emoluments.
The Department of Labor contributed greatly to the effective insistence that this rule of law be also a fact of American life.
Full employment— including equal employment opportunity—was put in the first place, instead of some place on down the line.
There emerged in the Department during this period—and to a lesser extent in the national philosophy—a sense of a dimension of the 'welfare of the wage earner" not contemplated when that phrase was adopted in 1913 as the Department's charge and charter. This is his welfare, even in connection with his work, not just as a wage earner but as a human being. The significant subtleties here—as pragmatic as they are philosophical—involve new questioning of the extent to which the worker is correctly conceived of as being created to meet the needs of the enterprise and the system, and of the extent to which it is the other way around; whether "employment" is sufficiently measured by counting people on jobs, or whether their satisfactions and the degree of use of their talents is also relevant; whether the economy is an end in itself or a means to serve a national human purpose of giving life a chance to flower whenever its seed is planted. In the later stages of the 5-year period there was new talk of the need for social indicators to supplement the economic indicators, new skepticism about the adherence by economists to definitions of unemployment which are only convenient measures of the use of the economy's capacity, cynicism about the general currency of the willingness to buy price stability with unemployment, and increased consideration of what is implied by "income maintenance" on the one hand and "job satisfactions" on the other.
It is hard to say and impossible to measure how much gain there was in these 5 vears so far as the development of this new dimension of the wage earner's welfare is concerned.
Infinitely more than before, most of the gain was atmospheric.
It was, in any event, the unifying and dignifying theme in the history of the Department of Labor, 1963 to 1968, that wage earners—and those seeking that status—are people.
Not statistics.
Not drones.
Human beings—for whom"work," but not just "labor" (a distinction clearer in other languages than in English), constitutes one of the potential ultimate satisfactions.
Of the eight principal officers who were administering the Department at the close of 1968, six had been there 5 years before, and the other two had deep roots in the Department's concerns and responsibilities.
Rarely if ever in Cabinet department history has there been comparable continuity of similarly dedicated and competent service.
This was an extraordinary group of people, knit by their differences (of race, religion, sex—everything except age) and by mutual respect and personal affection.
The business of operating a substantial organization was consciously and conscientiously attended to by this top management group.
Only two of them had brought any significant administrative experience with them to the positions they held.
For the others, administrative responsibility had to be an acquired taste.
Yet the Department achieved a considerable distinction as an agency where ideas were implemented and ideals given muscles.
The major organizational and program development during these 5 years was the establishment and building of an affirmative manpower program—a two billion dollar '"business" of bring training and employment opportunities to over a million Americans a year.
The program had to be developed in conjunction with other Federal agencies, State and local governments, and private organizations.
The problems of overcoming inertia, of creating a new federalism and recognizing as well a new pluralism, were formidable.
The results were almost beyond comprehension—but not above criticism, for every gain created new expectations.
The handling of emergency labor disputes during this period— largely by the Under Secretary—was a quiet classic of restrained resourcefulness.
What had to be done was done.
Not more.
At a time of epidemic exacerbation of discord and distemper in the country generally, something was happening—or not happening—that had an opposite influence in one of the traditional arenas of controversy.
The typical Department of Labor scene at the start of the 5-year period (1963–68) was of haggard men spending the night glaring at each other across the bargaining table, while the press and radio and television crews kept death watches in the corridors.
By the end of the period, the Labor Department was no longer even a regular newsbeat for most of the Washington press.
The perceptive historian will properly interest himself in what happened between 1963 and 1968 to the nightmare of "Government intervention in labor disputes," and may come up with some interesting reflections on government including self-government by competent men when there aren't many effective laws.
But the contemporary commentator will be inclined to let well enough alone.
The Department of Labor contributed greatly to the establishment of the fact of equal emplovment opportunity in America: through the manpower training and employment programs; by insistence through the Office of Federal Contract Compliance that those who deal with the Federal Government deal without discrimination with their own employees; by its own employment practices (in the higher as well as the lower grades); and by the forthright espousal by its spokesmen of an uncompromising position that one person is as good as another, except by his own default.
There were 195,000 braceros brought into this country in 1962: none in 1968.
That was quite a story.
Commissions on the Status of Women were established in all 50 States—or only one reflection of the Department's efforts to complement gallantry with good sense.
Election crises in two of the major labor unions were met responsively and constructively, under circumstances which made chaos one of the alternatives.
There was tardy but forthright action to call a halt to the rolling of dice with men's lives in the uranium mines.
The Department's Combined Federal Campaign quota was substantially exceeded in every one of the 5 years.
The selection of the Assistant Secretary for International Affairs as the Chairman of the Governing Body of the International Labor Organization for 1968–69 was only one reflection of his prominence and effectiveness in international affairs and relations.
The Department's relations with the Congress, particularly with the Appropriations Committee, were notably good—and effective.
So were its relations with the American Federation of Government Employees.
And with the AFL-CIO.
And with the Department of Commerce—particularly with all four Secretaries of Commerce.
The Coalition for Youth Action represented a start toward drawing, in the Department, on youth's particular strength.
The trouble with any such a listing is that it leaves out the largest fact of all: which was the carrying on of the Department's more traditional programs in such manner that there was no notice of them.
Finally, there must be included—to give these claims of virtue and achievement their validity—some illustrative suggestion of the disappointments, frustrations, failures of these 5 years.
Youth unemployment remains twice the adult rate, and among minority groups an incriminating 20 to 25 percent.
The definition and measurement of unemployment was not changed significantly during these 5 years—or during the past 15.
More broadly, social indicators were not developed to complement the economic indicators; and since we do only what we measure, the measuring principally of economic facts continues to contribute to a distortion of program emphasis.
The unemployment insurance laws remain substantially what they were a third of a century ago, and the barnacles on them have become rebukes to legislative and administrative responsibility.
The strong effort in 1968 to stimulate national and congressional concern about worker fatalities and occupational disease failed.
The protections of the Taft-Hartley Act have not been extended to those areas in which they are most needed (agricultural and "not for profit" enterprise); and the section 14(b) and situspicketing flaws remain.
The Department of Labor is not yet an effective participant in economic policy formulation within the Administration.
November 5, 1968.
In the broadest possible sweep of appraisal, the testing fact was that constantly during this period "the wage earners of the United States" had, almost certainly, increased reason to choose their own time and place and condition over any other that history affords.
The contribution of the Department of Labor to this fact was not separately identifiable.
But it was substantial—especially for its emphasis on the human purpose.