DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, Washington, D. C., November 20, 1920.
I beg to report re the administration of this department.
This is a vital question.
With the rapid settlement and changing conditions of the West, the wisdom of creating national parks and permanently setting apart as natural museums, pleasure grounds, and game preserves such wonder lands as the Yellowstone Park, the Grand Canyon, the Yosemite, the Sequoia (with its gigantic trees), and other national parks and monuments, and preserving for the present and for future generations these wonderful works of nature, and the wild animals and birds, so plentiful in the early days but now so scarce, is increasingly evident.
The conflict between the demands of commerce and the preservation of these wonder places involves constant vigilance.
In my view their preservation is of the first importance.
It should be the settled policy of the country, regardless of any question of utility, that when in the wisdom of the Congress national parks or monuments are definitely set apart they must be preserved in their integrity, forever free from any form of commercialization.
If this principle is not recognized, and commercialization in any form is allowed to creep in, it will be only a question of time when our Wild West will be only a memory and the big game of our country will be extinct, and these places and objects, now so wonderful will be seriously and permanently injured.
It may be well to note, however, that if the argument of utility were permissible, there is usually a ready answer.
The water does not remain in the park, and may ordinarily be stored to as good or better advantage outside the park.
This is well illustrated in the proposition to dam the Yellowstone River at the outlet of Yellowstone Lake.
The average daily flow at this station, based on complete records for 23 months, is 3,110 second-feet. There are five small streams emptying into the river in the 13 miles between the proposed dam site at the outlet of the lake and this station; hence the flow at' the outlet of the lake is obviously much less than at this station.
A station is also maintained on the Yellowstone River outside of the park, at Corwin Springs, Mont., near the head of Yankee Jim Canyon, some 8 miles below Gardiner.
The average daily flow at this point, shown by measurements made during the same period, is 5,870 second-feet.
The volume of water in the river outside the park is, therefore, nearly or quite twice as great as at the outlet of the lake.
Indeed, based upon these measurements and the area of land drained, it is the opinion of this department that it is more than twice as great.
This increased volume is due to the fact that between the gauging station near Canyon Hotel and Corwin Springs, the Lamar River, Gardiner River, Tower Creek, Trout Creek, Alum Creek, Otter Creek, Sour Creek, Broad Creek, Deep Creek, Hellroaring Creek, Antelope Creek, and other small streams empty into the Yellowstone.
A much better site for a dam—due not only to the greater volume of water, but to its location, its deep, narrow rock walls— is Yankee Jim Canyon.
It is on high ground, 7,741 feet altitude, and the drainage area, compared with other sections of the park, is more restricted and less subject to flood waters; the river from the outlet of the lake to the Upper Falls is placid and little subject to sudden rise.
In May, 1920, for instance, when the Lamar and other tributaries were raging, Yellowstone Lake was covered with ice.
Thé flood-control argument, therefore, demonstrates that the dan should be outside the park, and not at the outlet of the lake.
1. The Idaho project.
The first involved the use by Idaho people of Lakes Yellowstone, Shoshone, Lewis, and Heart, the four largest lakes of the park, and the Falls River Basin in the southwest corner of the park, and under a permit granted by the department before I became Secretary some surveys were made of Yellowstone Lake and the Falls River Basin.
The proposition is to build a dam at the outlet of Yellowstone Lake for storage to hold the level of the lake at approximately its high-water mark, the water thus stored to be conveyed by tunnel through the Continental Divide to Heart Lake, thence into Snake River, to be used in the neighborhood of Twin Falls, Idaho; and to use Shoshone and Lewis Lakes as reservoirs for the storage, the water also to be used in Idaho; to construct two dams in the Falls River Basin, erroneously claimed to be a swamp, the water to be stored there for use in the vicinity of Idaho Falls and north thereof.
Only the Falls River Basin part of this project has been pressed.
2. The Montana project.
An association composed of Montana people has been organized to secure the.
At first there was rivalry between Idaho and Montana, but this appears to have been composed.
It is urged that it is only desired to build the dam 6 feet high.
The most casual inspection of the shores of the lake shows that any material raising of the water would overflow many wonderful hot springs, as well as considerable timber areas; the timber in places comes down to the water's edge.
If the precedent of using the park is established and a 6-foot dam built and the water devoted to reclamation or power uses, increasing demands will speedily arise as other lands come under cultivation or need for more power arises, and the demand for a higher dam and more water will arise and will be well-nigh irresistible.
A dam at the place suggested of 25 feet could be built and the question would be "Why not"?
The park having been opened up, it would then be only a relative question.
Such a dam would submerge 9,000 acres of timber, meadow, lake beach, and small lakes—chiefly in the Pelican and Upper Yellowstone Valleys, only a few feet above the level of Lake Yellowstone.
The dam would submerge the small lakes and ruin the hot springs at the thumb of the lake.
The Upper Yellowstone Valley, which would be submerged, is our best moose range.
This involves a section of the park now practically inaccessible.
Claimants urge that its conversion from a marsh to a storage lake by the building of dams would enhance its beauty.
Fortunately during the summer it was visited and photographed by exploring parties and found to possess wondrous beauty-containing meadows (fine moose pasture), forests, lakes, trout streams, and a number of beautiful waterfalls, ranging from 130 feet to 380 feet.
The bill authorizing this project (S. 3895) passed the Senate April 6, 1920, apparently without opposition.
While in the House the purport of the bill became known, serious opposition appeared, and it did not pass, but is still pending.
The water stored in Yellowstone Lake, in the case of the Montana project, if not used until the late summer would lessen the flow over the falls during the early summer months, when the park is filled with visitors.
The Idaho project proposed to divert the surplus water from the lake so it would not go over the falls.
It is probable that such interference with the normal flow would injure the falls and materially decrease the volume of water in the canyon.
Lewis and Shoshone Lakes are both in well-timbered forests, and their shores slope upward very gradually; the rise is almost imperceptible over an area of several miles; vast quantities of timber would be destroyed; and when the water would be drawn out, shallow water or mud flats would greet the visitor.
Congress at its last session placed upon this department the duty of making a special investigation of the possible economy in fuel, labor, and material that could be secured by electrification of the railroads and industries of the region between Boston and Washington.
The plan contemplated is a unified system of power generation and power distribution, and its investigation has been called the superpower survey.
This is now under way.
The engineering profession and large business interests are giving this project support that is at once an indorsement and a promise of public confidence.
The engineering staff engaged in this intensive study of the power needs and the means of meeting that demand includes men who have done pioneer work in applying electricity to the use of man; while serving on an advisory board are men of vision and experience, representing our larger railroads as well as electric railways, our manufacturing and mining industries, and the engineering and chemical professions, busy men who have accepted my invitation to help direct this investigation along lines of greatest practical usefulness.
Every industry that has to do with either making power or using power is giving generous cooperation.
The area being studied, while only a small fraction of the United States—2 per cent—uses 24 per cent of the electric output of the central stations of the country and produces about 47 per cent of its manufactured products.
It is properly termed the finishing shop of American industry.
The report of this investigation will be completed June 30 next, and its purpose is to give an engineering solution to the problem of the demand of the Nation for greater production and better transportation.
That answer is electrification, but its details must include the accurate statement of costs in capital and of savings in coal and labor.
I believe the report will deserve public confidence.
During July, accompanied by the Secretary of the Navy, I visited Alaska, and inspected the Government railroad from Seward to the end of Steel (mile 245) and there observed the laying of ties and rails.
They are now laid to mile 264.
When completed, the standard-gauge line will extend from Seward to Nenana on the south bank of the Tanana River, 412 miles from Seward, with a standard-gauge branch of 38 miles leaving the main line at Matanuska Junction (mile 151) to the Chickaloon coal mines, with a spur of 3 miles on this branch to the Eska coal mines.
Fifty-four miles standard gauge are under operation from Healy (mile 358) to Nenana (mile 412), leaving a gap of 94 miles between Gold Creek (mile 264) and Healy.
From the north bank of the Tanana River (North Nenana), a narrow-gauge road of 54 miles is in operation to Fairbanks.
From Happy station on this line, 7 miles south of Fairbanks, a narrow-gauge branch of 32 miles extends to Chatanika.
Total mileage in operation, 445.
Total when completed, 540.
The clearing on the gap is practically completed, and approximately 40 miles of grading done.
The entire road, including the 3,000-foot bridge over the Tanana River at Nenana, should be completed and in operation by the end of the summer of 1922.
The Chickaloon mine is being operated for the Navy.
A shaft of 600 feet has been sunk and working levels opened.
The coal is a fine quality of bituminous, as good as Pocahontas.
The vein is irregular, and it is not possible to estimate with accuracy the amount of this coal.
Eska is 20 miles west of Chickaloon.
There the coal is low grade, bituminous, and is being mined by the Engineering Commission for the railroad, and for domestic needs.
Two leases have recently been made here to private parties.
All the coal must be washed; a washing plant is in course of construction.
Lignite coal in abundance is found south of Nenana, and is being mined for railroad and domestic purposes.
Two private companies are operating in this field.
Many complaints are made re governmental conditions in Alaska.
The problem of government in a country like Alaska is not an easy one.
It is not homogeneous; the settlements are widely separated, with no adequate means of communication.
It is almost as difficult to get from Juneau to Nome as from Juneau or Nome to Seattle.
The winters are long and snows deep, with relatively few roads or trails, and these in the winter are practically impassable.
This will continue to a greater or less extent until the country is opened up by railroads.
It is not clear, therefore, how a larger measure of local government would serve a useful purpose.
To aid in solving the problem, in April last I appointed a committee consisting of Dr. Alfred H. Brooks, chief geologist of Alaska, who has spent much of his time for more than 20 years in Alaska, as chairman; Mr. Otto Praeger, Second Assistant Postmaster General and in charge of mails for Alaska; E. A. Sherman, Department of Agriculture, in charge of its forests; and H. Y. Saint, of the Shipping Board, familiar with transportation problems to Alaska.
Hearings were held and every phase of the subject considered.
Attention is invited to the report pub.
It was the judgment of the committee that the wise course was to coordinate the different departments of the Government having to do with Alaska through a committee consisting of a representative from each department.
Interior Department.
George A. Parks, mineral examiner and chief of field division, general land office, Alaska.
Post Office Department.
James B. Corridon, superintendent of railway adjustments.
Department of Agriculture.
E.
A. Sherman, associate forester.
Department of Commerce.
Dr.
Hugh M. Smith, Commissioner of Fisheries.
United States Shipping Board.
H.
Y. Saint, staff assistant, office of Director of Operations.
At the threshold of Alaskan development is the subject of transportation.
Adequate steamship service with reasonable rates for passengers and freight from the Pacific coast to Alaska is imperative; now the service is inadequate.
The Alaska Steamship Co., under the same control as the Copper River Railroad and the copper interests in Alaska, and the Pacific Steamship Co., operate a more or less regular service.
There is not enough business for both companies.
Ordinarily the boats run about 50 per cent capacity, while during the spring and fall, peak-load seasons, persons and freight are compelled at times to wait weeks for space.
The Alaska Steamship Co. has a strong position in that its copper ores mined in Alaska furnish return cargoes for its boats.
A simple solution of the problem would be to consolidate the two companies, reduce the expenses by taking off unnecessary boats during ordinary times.
This would give a reasonably full cargo at all times.
Then secure from the Shipping Board, if need be, additional boats to meet peak-load demands which come uniformly in the early spring and early fall, the Shipping Board to see that a substantial reduction in rates and fares result.
The board has ample power to do this.
Efforts have been made to accomplish this result, but so far without success, the Alaska Steamship Co. refusing to sell.
Unless some such plan is effected, the necessity for a genuine development of Alaska may make it necessary for the Government to operate its own line of steamships to Alaska, even at a loss, and provide an adequate service at reasonable rates.
If this is done, and a fairly liberal policy adopted, business will revive as soon as conditions in the States become normal.
The department has given consideration to the problem of domestic reconstruction as related to farming.
The census figures show that during the past decade our cities have grown much faster than farm population; the rate of increase on the farms is only one-fifth of that of the Nation as a whole.
Between 1900 and 1910 the number of farms increased 10.9 per cent, while between 1910 and 1920 only 1.4 per cent.
In Ohio, according to the Department of Agriculture, the number of vacant farm houses increased during the year ending June 30, 1920, from 18,000 to 29,000, or 61 per cent, and the number of men and boys on Ohio farms during the same period decreased 30 per cent.
Other States present more or less similar conditions.
Production of foodstuffs was enormously stimulated during the war, resulting in an increase in 1914-1920; but if the decrease above reported continues, what will be the result?
The difficulty is that people do not like to live alone, but prefer to live in towns and villages and to enjoy society and the conveniences and comforts of modern life which are beyond the reach of a scattered population living on large farms.
Can this be remedied by the ownership of small farms and the formation of neighborhood associations?
Small farms bringing people nearer together and intensive cultivation of these farms, may be the answer.
Nothing can be better for a country than that people should be attracted to the land and given the opportunity to become independent without being compelled to live in isolation and without the comforts of life.
If the farm unit was 40 acres, better results could be obtained than if the unit is 80 or 160 acres, and living conditions could be made much more attractive.
Three measures are now pending before Congress which would authorize the Department of the Interior to aid persons desiring to do so to procure farms.
All embody the plan of community settlement originally presented in the bill (H. R. 457), urged upon Congress by the President.
While primarily designed to provide farms and employment for service men, they could be made to cover a wider field.
The plan is included in the four-option bill (H. R. 14157) advocated by the American Legion, which passed the House in May.
Section 6 of the bill is virtually the same measure (H. R. 487) known as the Mondell bill, authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to create community settlements in States where feasible projects can be found, and provides an appropriation of $500,000,000 for the purpose.
This is pending in the Senate.
Bill S. 4372, entitled "World War farm and home-building act," introduced by Senator Borah, has much the same object as the Mondell bill, and appropriates $300,000,000.
The third measure (S. 3477), now pending, was introduced by Senator Smoot, and is widely known as the"rural homes bill."
Primarily designed for community settlements of modest size, this bill is unique in the fact that it does not call for an appropriation.
It authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to contract with individuals or corporations for the reclamation, improvement, and settlement of lands in private ownership.
Landowners could call upon the Secretary to investigate the feasibility of proposed projects, and later to undertake their development; but the cost of investigation and construction must be deposited with the Treasurer of the United States before the work is undertaken—all moneys to be paid out on vouchers signed by the Secretary.
This would furnish protection for the homeseeker in the purchase price and give him the benefit of thorough preliminary studies and investigations made by trained and experienced minds, and he would know that the improvements would be made and the money wisely expended.
The department believes that much important work can be promptly undertaken if this measure becomes a law.
The Reclamation Service is available to do the work should the bill pass.
The policy of issuing fee patents to Indians for their lands and thus placing them in a position to sell is, in my judgment, fraught with the gravest danger and will inevitably pauperize thousands.
Every Indian family should own a home.
This is essential for their ultimate independence.
Until the Indians are educated and by long experience become accustomed to the business methods of the whites they will not be in a position to deal with the whites on even terms.
The experience of this Department is full of evidence that the Indians are likely to speedily lose their lands by selling them for a wholly inadequate consideration, then improvidently spend the proceeds.
To place all Indians on a plane of business equality with the whites will take generations, and those good people who by legislation or other artificial means seek to unduly hasten this period and thrust the responsibility upon the Indian of dealing with the white man before he is able to do so are doing the Indian a serious injury.
This is no reflection upon the capacity of the Indian as such; but it takes time for any race of people, however strong intellectually, to know, understand, and appreciate commercial business methods.
There are exceptions, but not enough on which to rest a legislative program.
The Indian should have citizenship, and his children should, where possible, be educated in the same schools with the whites and be encouraged in every way to become a part and parcel of our national civilization.
Under the act of June 28, 1906 (34 Stat. L., 539), the land on the Osage Indian Reservation, Okla., aggregating 1,465,000 acres, was allotted to enrolled members of the tribe (except some 20,000 acres for railroads, town sites, etc.),and all minerals under the lands reserved to the tribe for a period of 25 years, after which-unless the trust period was extended by the Congress-the minerals became the property of the individual owner of the land.
Meantime many of the Indians have sold the surface of the land to settlers for $10 or less per acre; and unless Congress acts the persons who own the surface will in 1931 become the owners in fee of the lands for this inadequate consideration, which, of course, would carry with it the ownership of all minerals, oils, etc.
It was clearly the understanding when the lands were sold that the purchasers acquired only surface rights.
Similar lands which were sold in fee carrying mineral and oil rights sold for $100 or more per acre and averaged $95 per acre.
Out of the total of 1,465,000 acres, approximately 500,000 acres have been leased for oil or minerals, leaving about 1,000,000 acres still affected by the trust period.
The Indians urge that the trust period be extended by the Congress so they may not be deprived of their mineral rights.
This, in the view of the department, is plainly right; and, as stated to the chairmen of the Committees on Indian Affairs in the Senate and the House March 29, 1920, in letters then written, I.again strongly urge the extension of this trust period.
Objection is made by persons who bought the surface rights.
Should they succeed in defeating the extension they would be getting something for nothing at the expense of the Indians.
Secretary.
1. Allowed during the fiscal year original entries of Indian and public lands, 16,434,491.55 acres; an increase of 4,566,310.05 acres over the area entered and allowed during the fiscal year, 1919.
2. Patented during the fiscal year, 11,850,401.337 acres; an increase of·1,073,399.988 acres over the area patented in 1919.
3. Collected from all sources during the year, $6,131,776.41, and expended during the same period in the public-land service, $3,364,- 919.96, leaving a net surplus of $2,766,856.45 of receipts over expenditures.
4. Collected and turned into the Treasury of the United States as a result of the work of the Field Service, $131,342.06.
5. Restored to the public domain as a result of investigations in the field, 137,250 acres.
6. Investigated in the field and reported upon 20,865 cases.
7. Conducted 332 hearings in Government contests.
8 Obtained 36 convictions in criminal cases prosecuted during the year.
9. Secured as escrow deposits by oil operators under the act of August 25, 1914, since the passage of the act, and under special agreements, $9,912,398.40.
10. Instituted four suits to recover possession of oil lands in Louisiana and for an accounting for the oil extracted therefrom, valued at $317,919.38.
11. Secured a decree quieting title in the United States to 22,514 acres of Arkansas "lake lands," valued at $1,000,000.
12. Filed two bills in equity involving 5,000 acres of Arkansas "lake lands," of the claimed value of $400,000.
13. Approved and accepted surveys and resurveys covering an area of 12,478,714 acres, an excess of 4,810,201 acres over the surveys of the year previous.
14. Entered of record 396,324 tract-book notations, as compared with 376,151 notations the year previous.
15. Approved for patent 40,095 final homestead entries.
16. Allowed 36,000 stock-raising homestead entries.
17. Secured the withdrawal, after field investigation, of 2,406,815 acres for stock driveways; the total area now included in such withdrawals being 8,898,258 acres.
39. Awarded two leases for coal lands in Alaska, one in Cook Inlet field and one in the Nenana field; two applications pending, one in the Bering River field and one in the Matanuska field.
40. Received 143 applications for potash prospecting permits on which 61 permits were granted.
Total number of permits granted during the year, 162.
41. Patented 30,658 acres under one mineral entry of potash lands in Salt Lake desert, for which the sum of $76,645 was received.
42. Opened and restored 5,220,565 acres of land subject to the preferred right of entry by ex-service men under public resolution No. 29 of February 14, 1920.
43. Eliminated from National Forests 35,179 acres of school grant lands through cooperative exchange with the grantee States.
45. Decided 838 litigated cases, and disposed of on default of 2,624 cases.
1. Issued circular information concerning the legal status of the Indians, elicited by ill-considered criticism, and set forth the recent administrative policies with evidence of Indian progress thereunder, including the bureau's attitude in support of legislation to confer citizenship upon all Indians on the basis of their American nativity but to retain under Government control the estates of incompetents.
2. Reaffirmed the purpose to withhold permission for the use of Indians for exhibition purposes, as inconsistent with their industrial and social advancement and less remunerative than domestic activities on their allotments.
3. Announces a steady increase in attendance of Indian children in State public schools since 1913 and a consequent reduction in the number of Government boarding and day schools, a condition that should result in an extension of Government schools in localities where educational facilities are inadequate.
4. Finds it difficult to maintain normal service in the field because employees secure better pay elsewhere, for which no remedy is yet apparent except some advance in salaries.
5. Reports unusual gains in the number of wage-earning Indians in all lines of industrial and business occupations.
6. Indian interest and expansion in farming and in modern methods is marked.
Indian fairs have increased from 12 in 1912 to about 70.
Indian borrowers of reimbursable funds are making satisfactory payments.
7. Surplus Indian lands are bringing greatly increased rentals mainly due to new regulations for leasing to the highest bidder.
A revenue of $8,000,000 was received from this source.
8. Completed systematic surveys·have brought reservation ranges up to normal carrying capacity and they now support the largest number of stock consistent with proper conservation of grass.
Fortyseven thousand Indians are engaged in stock raising, and the value of their live stock has increased from $22,238,242 in 1912 to $37,- 876,272 in 1919.
9. All epidemics were successfully controlled and the two most obstinate diseases, tuberculosis and trachoma, are now practically eradicated from Indian schools.
10. Made large timber sales on several western reservations at the highest stumpage prices ever received.
11. On the Osage Reservation, Okla., leased for oil 98,866 acres for bonuses aggregating $12,110,100, besides a royalty of 16% per cent and upward.
12. Removed restrictions against alienation from 209,945.64 acres of allotted lands of individual Indians in the Five Civilized Tribes.
Received for restricted individuals of these tribes as oil bonuses, royalties, and rentals $4,774,566.31; and 242 restricted Indians paid $351,148.18 as Federal income tax.
13. On November 1 opened a number of reservations to prospecting and lease for mining metalliferous minerals under regulations to make effective provisions of section 26 of the Indian appropriation act of June 30, 1919.
14. The value of irrigation on Indian lands is instanced by the fact that on the Yakima Reservation the gross value of crops on irrigated projects last year was $10,000,000, which is more than three times the entire cost of irrigation work within the reservation.
15. Crime has greatly decreased on the reservations since the coming of national prohibition.
16. Issued under the "Declaration of policy" of 1917, and on proof of competency of allottees or heirs, and on recommendation of competency commissions, 6,426 fee simple patents, involving 938,418 acres, making approximately twice as many patents issued in the last three years as in the 10 years preceding.
17. Conducted extensive allotment work on a number of reservations and made 737 allotments on the public domain.
18. Made final disposition of 5,368 heirship cases; approved 98 wills and disapproved 60; held hearings by 15 examiners of inheritance on 26 reservations.
19. Formulated a plan whereby the Department of Justice has taken charge of litigation against encroaching settlement by whites and Mexicans on Pueblo Indian lands in New Mexico.
United States Court of Claims, as provided by recent acts of Congress which were urged by this department.
1. Paid for pensions, $213,295,314.65.
2. Returned to the Treasury $1,820,172.01 of the amount appropriated for the payment of pensions.
3. Returned to the Treasury $77,637.26 of the sum appropriated for the maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries of special examiners.
4. Under the acts of May 1 and June 5, 1920, a section of experts formed in the bureau handled 47,939 cases not requiring declarations in less than five weeks.
5. Upon the passage of the act of May 22, 1920, an act for the retirement of employees of the classified civil service, and for other purposes, a division organized in the bureau promptly set about carrying out the provisions of the act.
6. Receipts for addresses, certified copies, etc. (act Aug. 24, 1912), $6,860.62.
Refundments to pension appropriations, $10,929.47.
Miscellaneous receipts, $1,345.86.
1. Conducted an extensive correspondence on educational matters.
In all, 166,746 letters were received, eight times as many as in 1910.
2. Printed and distributed 92 publications, 40,000 copies semimonthly of"School Life," four numbers of "Americanization," and numerous reprints.
Aided in distribution of 70,000 copies weekly of"Geographical News Bulletin."
3. Gave information to 40,000 returned soldiers about special courses for them in colleges of agriculture and mechanic arts.
4. Held conferences on highway engineering and highway transport, junior colleges, and Americanization.
5. Conducted five detailed and comprehensive educational surveys and made seven surveys on special phases of one or another school system.
6. Planned a national campaign of education for education and began it by holding the first National Citizens' Conference on Education at Washington, D. C. Held in furtherance of this campaign a special conference at Washington and a State conference at Greensboro, N. C.
7. Held various conferences on commercial education, industrial education, home economics, and the betterment of rural schools.
8. Gave numerous addresses and lectures on education throughout the United States.
9. Enrolled in school-directed home gardening approximately 2,000,000 children, who produced about $40,000,000 worth of food.
Distributed school-garden manuals throughout five climatic regions of the United States.
10. Established 42 centers for the distribution of moving-picture films.
Four million nine hundred and twenty-seven thousand feet of film were circulated and exhibited to 8,500,000 persons.
11. Aided community organization in the District of Columbia and presented community center program to the country at large in 104 single lectures and 10 courses of 6 lectures each.
12. Made 10 important studies of conditions in rural schools throughout the United States.
13. Made important studies of and held conferences on village and mining town schools.
Began publication of a series of extension leaflets on kindergarten training and distributed large quantities of material in the promotion of kindergarten education.
14. Published and distributed a series of health education pamphlets and classroom weight records, and by correspondence and lectures promoted child health in schools of the United States.
Prepared five special studies for the promotion of child health.
15. Established plan of cooperation in nine States for carrying out the work in connection with the home-reading courses.
Sixteen after-war courses were issued and distributed.
16. Prepared a series of lessons for training children in citizenship.
17. Prepared for publication two bulletins on home economics.
Held conferences on home economics and on industrial and vocational education.
18. Gave advice in regard to school legislation to State departments of education, State legislatures, school officers, and teachers.
Prepared and issued bulletins on school laws.
19. Aided in planning school plants and took direct charge in an advisory capacity of the construction of a number of school buildings.
20. Published and prepared for publication 16 circulars on higher education.
21. Published standardized courses of study for accredited commercial schools.
Completed a foreign trade-training survey of 12 cities.
22. Prepared 12 reports on educational conditions in foreign countries.
23. Completed plan of gathering statistics in cooperation with State departments of education.
Published seven statistical chapters of the biennial survey for 1917-18 and prepared five chapters for printing.
24. Revised 112 bibliographies and compiled 84.
Received 810 calls of consultation at the library and made 2,151 loans of books.
Gave libraries information regarding publications and work of the Federal executive departments.
25. Received requests for 5,600 teachers and made 5,000 nominations for positions.
26. Established research stations for the study of special problems in education at 16 universities and colleges; held two conferences for organization and direction of research work.
27. Approved expenditures of colleges of agriculture and mechanic arts and prepared statistical reports on the work of these institutions.
28. Administered the education, medical relief, and support of the natives of Alaska.
1. Carried on cooperative geologic investigations in 29 States.
3. Performed laboratory work including more than 1,000 chemical analyses.
4. Continued economic studies of manganese, chromite, tungsten, helium, white clays, mica, asbestos, and other mineral deposits.
5. Rendered geologic assistance to the Bureau of Mines, Office of Indian Affairs, and General Land Office, of the Department of the Interior; as well as to Departments of War, Navy, State, Justice, Treasury, and Commerce, and to semiofficial scientific organizations.
6. Revived and completed a number of broad investigations of both economic and scientific value which had been interrupted by the war.
7. Continued geologic and paleontologic investigations of oil shales in Nevada and in the Uinta Basin.
8. Continued work on geologic folios, deferred on account of the war.
Completed two folios and performed work on three others.
9. Prosecuted work on two geologic handbooks designed for popular education, one covering the New England States and one including Maryland and Delaware.
10. Continued investigations of deep-well temperatures, which may indicate whether the temperature of oil-bearing areas is greater than that of non oil-bearing areas.
11. Made topographic surveys of areas in Alaska aggregating 2,300 square miles and geologic surveys of areas aggregating 2,700 square miles.
12. Continued general investigations in Alaska, examining especially mineral deposits in the region now being developed by the Government railroad.
13. Continued stream gauging in southeastern Alaska in cooperation with the Forest Service, with special reference to the development of water power for use in the wood-pulp and mining industries.
14. Carried on statistical inquiries and correspondence, in cooperation with the Bureau of the Census, with more than 100,000 mineral producers in the United States.
15. Prosecuted cooperative statistical work in cooperation with the National Coal Association.
16. Continued preparation and issue of weekly statement on coal production and monthly statement on petroleum production; during the coal strike in the fall of 1919 issued daily statement on coal supply.
17. Continued investigations of stream flow by maintaining more than 1,300 gauging stations in 39 States and in Hawaii and Alaska.
18. Carried on investigations of underground water in 14 States and Hawaii and the Dominican Republic.
19. Made special investigations of water resources in connection with classification of public lands with particular reference to the use of water for power or for agriculture under enlarged-homestead, desert-land, and Carey Acts.
20. Continued statistical studies and mapping of transmission lines and electrical power generating plants of public-utility companies.
Issued monthly statements on production of electric power and consumption of fuel by public-utility power plants.
21. Classified 24,158 acres of public lands as to their content of coal, 6,449 acres as coal land and 17,709 acres as noncoal land.
22. Recommended withdrawal of 2,797 acres of coal land and restoration to entry of 525,726 acres, the classification and appraisal of which had been completed.
23. Cooperated with the General Land Office and the Indian Office in supplying information concerning the mineral or nonmineral value and the value as to water resources of lands for which applications have been filed, acting on 32,917 requests for information.
24. Recommended the designation of 4,583,577 acres of land as nonirrigable under the enlarged-homestead act and the cancellation of the designation of 421,337 acres that had been previously classed as nonirrigable.
25. Recommended the withdrawal of 62,584 acres for power sites and the restoration of 40,966 acres, increasing the total now so reserved to 2,587,615 acres.
26. Defined and segregated for leasing under the new leasing act of February 25, 1920, nine "known geologic structures of producing oil or gas fields."
27. Recommended the designation of 54,312,588 acres of stockraising lands, raising the total area so designated to 74,492,336 acres.
28. Recommended designations increasing the area of public-water reserves to 239,283 acres.
Recommended designation under the Nevada ground-water reclamation act of 57,600 acres.
29. Mapped topographically 12,392 square miles of territory in the United States.
30. Ran 4,788 linear miles of primary levels and 3,628 miles of primary-traverse lines.
31. Established 1,811 permanent bench marks and triangulation stations.
32. Prepared 6 large-scale special maps for artillery use in the Army.
33. Prepared 16 confidential military reports of surveyed areas for the use of the War Department.
34. Prosecuted surveys in the Virgin Islands and Porto Rico and in the Dominican Republic and Republic of Haiti.
35. Engraved and published 68 topographic maps of areas in the United States and one State map, printing 711,872 copies of new and reprinted maps.
36. Printed more than 4,000,000 copies of various maps, charts, ,etc.
37. Distributed 898,388 copies of topographic and other maps, increasing the sales by 70 per cent.
38. Published 153 reports containing 17,163 pages.
39. Distributed 639,086 books and folios, embodying geologic reports on water-resources investigations, mineral statistics, etc.
1. Continued the construction and operation of irrigation works, and actually irrigated in 1919 more than 1,187,000 acres of arid land, covered by project statistics, producing crops valued at nearly $89,000,000.
Including land furnished either in whole or in part with water from the works of the service, under the Warren Act, the value of crops produced in 1919 amounted to nearly $140,000,000.
2. Increased the area irrigated and covered by crop census 68,000 acres over that of the previous year.
3. Operated irrigation works including 40 reservoirs, a number of power and pumping plants, more than 12,600 miles of canals and drains, as well as pipe lines, flumes, and tunnels, and thousands of structures, such as dams, headgates, weirs, checks, drops, etc.
4. Continued the extension of the projects, including the construction of 349 miles of canals and drains, more than 5,300 canal structures, nearly 300 bridges, and more than 66,000 linear feet of pipe, and excavated nearly 6,000,000 cubic yards of earth and rock.
5. Opened to entry during the fiscal year 290 farm units, all but 23 of which had been filed on at the end of the year.
Under the joint resolution of February 14, 1920, soldiers, sailors, and marines were given a preference right of entry for 60 days on land opened subsequent to that date.
The terms of the resolution applied to 187 of the farms, and at the end of the fiscal year 173 farms had been filed on by ex-service men.
6. Offered for sale, under the terms of the act of Congress of January 25, 1917, the mesa lands in the first unit of the Yuma Auxiliary project, comprising about 6,400 acres.
Of the 532 farms, 518 had been sold at the end of the fiscal year.
7. Began construction of the Riverton project in Wyoming which, on completion will comprise an irrigable area of approximately 100,000 acres.
8. Cooperated with other departments of the Government, with other bureaus of the Interior Department, with State governments, and with numerous local project organizations in the furtherance of reclamation work and the interests of the water users.
1. During the year trained 10,177 miners in first-aid and minerescue methods at the mine safety cars and stations, as compared with 9,781 in the fiscal year 1919.
3. Cooperated with the Army and Navy in work on the recovery of helium from natural gas.
4. Distributed several million pounds of surplus explosives allotted by the War Department to different branches of the Department of the Interior for use in road building and other work.
5. Inspected and analyzed fuels purchased by the United States Government.
6. Conducted tests of electrical mining equipment, including coalcutting machines, storage-battery locomotives, shot-blasting units, and electric miners' lamps, with regard to safety devices and permissibility for use in gaseous coal mines.
7. Worked on the preparation of leasing reguiations for coal lands on the public domain.
Investigated the standardization of coals for the export trade.
Collected information on methods of coal mining throughout the United States for a monograph showing mining practices employed in the several districts.
8. Investigated coal-mine fires and explosions, with a view to making recommendations for lessening explosion and fire hazards.
Continued tests of the explosibility of coal dust from different mines, as well as testing the explosibility of industrial dusts, such as zinc dust and sulphur dust.
9. Continued investigations of ventilation in metal mines of the West, of rock dust in metal mines, and of high temperatures and humidity in relation to their effect on the miner's health.
Studied use of underground loading machines in mines throughout the country.
Continued an investigation of methods of timbering in metal mines.
10. Prepared for publication a report on the use of liquid oxygen explosives in Germany during the war, and continued experiments with a view to determining the suitability of such explosives for mining work in this country.
11. Conducted for the Army and Navy an investigation of coal, metal, and salt mines, with a view to their suitability for the storage of helium obtained from natural gas.
12. In cooperation with the New York and New Jersey State tunnel commissions, determined the composition of exhaust gases from motor vehicles and the probable vitiation of tunnel air by such gases.
13. Conducted experiments on the washing of Illinois coals with a view to the improvement of quality and the removal of sulphur.
Studied the occurrence and distribution of sulphur in coal.
Investigated practice in the coal-washing plants of the State of Washington.
14. Prepared a comprehensive bulletin on recent developments in the brass-furnace industry.
15. Conducted experiments on the recovery of potash from the alunite ores of Utah.
16. Began an investigation of slate quarrying with a view to increasing the efficiency of quarry methods and reducing waste of slate.
Collected information on methods of preparing talc and soapstone.
17. Continued an investigation of volatilization methods for extracting lead, gold, and silver from low-grade and complex ores.
Investigated methods of leaching the low-grade copper ores of Arizona.
18. Continued a study of the chemical and physical properties of radium and radium products.
19. In cooperation with the State of Colorado, made a general survey of the complex and low-grade ores of that State with a view to determining the extent of such ores and the best methods of treatment.
20. Continued to investigate methods of mining and treating the low-grade iron ores of the Lake Superior district, and began experiments on the smelting of low-grade ores in an experimental blast furnace.
21. Conducted tests of use of coke as a house-heating fuel.
22. Conducted experiments on the concentration and flotation of the ores of molybdenum, vanadium, and quicksilver.
Continued a study of the physical and chemical principles underlying the recovery of minerals by the flotation process.
23. Cooperated with the ceramic department of the University of Washington in an investigation of the clays of that State.
24. Investigated practice at water-gas plants in the Middle West with a view to the utilization of local bituminous coals as a generator fuel.
25. Continued cooperative work for the Navy on the preparation of special alloy steels.
26. Conducted an investigation, in cooperation with the State of Utah and the city of Salt Lake, of smoke conditions and the abatement of smoke in Salt Lake City.
27. Prepared plans for an experimental plant at New Salem, N. Dak., where the bureau will study methods of carbonizing lignite.
28. Assisted in preparing operating regulations to protect oil and gas leases on Government lands from waste and damage in drilling and development.
29. Cooperated with the National Committee on the Conservation of Natural Gas in formulating measures intended to conserve supplies of natural gas by more efficient methods of production, transportation, and utilization.
Gave demonstrations of ways to prevent waste of gas in the home.
30. Aided in revising specifications for gasoline and lubricating oil to meet changed conditions, thus making available as motor fuel millions of gallons of gasoline that would have gone into other products.
Assisted State agencies in preparing regulations for the purchase and sale of petroleum products.
31. Set forth in a bulletin the best methods of studying underground conditions in oil fields, and of developing oil fields most efficiently.
32. Advised and assisted producers in the oil fields of Oklahoma and Texas in overcoming drilling and development problems, with the result that large financial savings have been effected, and the ultimate production of the fields greatly enhanced.
33. Supervised investigations in Wyoming and Colorado oil fields looking to increased efficiency and economy in production methods, effecting at one well alone a saving greater than the cost of the investigative work for the year.
34. Prepared recommendations for correcting conditions causing waste of gas in the Monroe gas field of Louisiana.
35. Studied methods of increasing the ultimate recovery of oil from oil sands.
Investigated methods of testing oil, gas, and waterbearing strata in drilling for oil and gas.
36. Studied the underground movement of water, oil, and gas, and their rearrangement in pay sands, with a view to overcoming water troubles in wells.
37. Assisted certain State legislatures in revising regulations for drilling oil wells through coal beds.
38. In cooperation with the Bureau of Internal Revenue continued to study methods for the proper valuation of oil lands.
39. Gave technical advice on the condition of oil lands in the litigated area on the Texas-Oklahoma boundary.
40. Compiled monthly reports on the operation of petroleum refineries, showing the output of the refineries and the consumption of crude.
41. Studied evaporation losses of oil in storage and showed that losses in the Mid-Continent field of more than 122,000,000 gallons a year could be largely eliminated through the adoption of feasible practices.
42. Conducted experiments on the cracking of heavy crude oils and developed a process to the point where it is now ready for commercial test.
43. Showed that gasoline left in residual gases from compression plants can largely be recovered by further treatment of the gas in an auxiliary absorption plant.
44. Conducted a survey of the motor gasolines marketed in the United States and published a report on the subject.
45. Definitely settled that the loss of heating value in natural gas through removal of the gasoline content is negligible.
46. Cooperated with the States of Utah and Colorado in experimental work on the refining of oil shales.
47. Investigated the causes of metal losses in the preparation of aluminum-alloy castings.
48. Continued experiments on the utilization of American graphites in crucibles.
49. Made washing and burning tests of white clays of the East in order to determine their value for ceramic uses.
50. Conducted an investigation of domestic magnesite and dolomite with a view to furthering their use for fire-resistant brick and other products.
51. Investigated methods of chlorinating natural gas for the manufacture of carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, and other products.
52.
Determined the causes of the corrosion of Army rifles after cleaning and storage.
53. Investigated the use of gas masks in different industries and developed methods of testing masks for permissibility.
54. Completed a study of the preparation, chemistry, and uses of zirconium.
55. During the year the Government fuel yards handled 266,942 tons of coal, 689 cords of wood, 1,122 bushels of charcoal, and 23 tons of coke.
This was distributed to approximately 725 points.
Notwithstanding the general shortage of coal, due to miners' strikes in November, 1919, and strikes of railroad employees in April and May, 1920, no consumer was short of coal, this record being possible because of the supply of coal that was in the storage yard.
Because of unsettled conditions in the coal trade, it was impossible to make contracts for coal for the coal year beginning April 1, 1920, but through the cooperation of the National Coal Association bituminous coal for April, May, and June requirements was obtained at $4.25 per net ton, f.
1. Continued and expanded the work of informing the public about the national parks and monuments under the jurisdiction of this service.
2. Handled the largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the parks; 1920 season, 919,504; 1919 season, 755,325; 1918 season, 451,661; 1917 season, 488,268; 1916 season, 356,097; 1915 season, 334,799; 1914 season, 235,193.
3. Automobile travel to the parks during the 1920.
4. Handled the largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the national monuments; 1920 season, 138,951; 1919 season, 56,191.
5. Collected $316,877.96 in revenues from the various 'operations within the national parks.
6. Maintained high efficiency of entire national-park organization, both in the field and in Washington, under small war-time appropriă- tions and under heavy demands made by unprecedented influx of tourists into the parks and monuments.
7. Prepared 229,840 and distributed 154,909 publications relating to these recreational areas.
8. Prepared and distributed 103,000 automobile maps of the national parks.
Continued the circulation of a large quantity of motion-picture film and lantern slides of scenes in the national parks and monuments.
9. Cooperated with highway and other associations in dissemination of information regarding parks and monuments.
10. Fostered the development of museum exhibits in Yellowstone, Rocky Mountain, Sequoia, Mesa Verde, and Yosemite National Parks, and at the Casa Grande National Monument for the delectation and education of the public.
11. Gave particular attention to the conservation of the wild life of the parks and monuments by reduction in number of predatory animals and establishment of game preserves.
12. Continued cooperative work with the Bureau of Service, National Parks and Monuments, of the United States Railroad Administration, established in Chicago, until its termination as Government enterprise, to inform the public regarding railroad rates and tours to the national parks and monuments and other resorts throughout the country.
13. Cooperated with the National Parks Association, the University of California, and other organizations in the dissemination of information leading to a broader use and appreciation of the national parks and monuments.
14. Continuer the course of lectures on the natural attractions of the Yosemite National Park, and established a free nature-guide service therein.
15. Lent many photographs of important national park and monument scenes to exhibitions in this country and abroad.
16. Zion National Park created November 19, 1919, thereby adding Utah's scenic masterpiece to the national-park family.
17. Assumed administration of the Grand Canyon National Park as such, and arranged for complete service to public under national park policies, both on north and south rims.
18. Dedicated the Grand Canyon and the Zion National Parks to their great destiny as public recreation grounds for the Nation.
19. Secured establishment of two new national monuments, Scotts Bluff in Nebraska, and Yucca House in Colorado, under the antiquities act.
20. Secured enlargement of the Gran Quivira National Monument for more effective protection and administration.
21. Established the National Park to Park Highway, the great connected scenic highway between the major parks.
22. Secured cession of complete jurisdiction over Yosemite, Sequoia, and General Grant National Parks from the State of California, and its acceptance by Congress.
23. Began improvement of Zion and Lassen Volcanic National Parks under initial appropriations granted by Congress.
24. Investigated status of lands in Hawaii National Park, and secured enactment of legislation to serve as basis for exchanging private lands within the park for Territorial lands.
25. Secured donation of many valuable tracts of land for the enlargement of the Lafayette National Park, through the personal efforts of the superintendent, George B. Dorr.
26. Secured donation of block of land in city of Hot Springs, Ark., for erection of free public bathhouse.
27. Through private donations secured the elimination of important private holdings in the Sequoia National Park, containing the last of the big tree stands in the Giant Forest in private ownership.
28. Through strenuous efforts and the cooperation of publicspirited citizens and societies saved the elk herds of the Yellowstone from extermination by starvation and the rigors of an exceptionally hard winter.
29. Conducted investigations of large tracts of land containing the redwood, both the sempervirens and the gigantea, in cooperation with the Save the Redwoods League and other organizations with a view to the further conservation of these rapidly diminishing trees.
30. In cooperation with the States and private parties, continued efforts to save strips of timber along scenic highways leading to and from parks.
31. Cooperated with scientific and educational associations in excavation and research work in the Chaco Canyon National Monument.
32. Secured cancellation of invalid mining claims in the Grand Canyon National Park, thereby making additional important areas available for development for the public.
33. In cooperation with Smithsonian Institution conducted excavation and exploration work of ruins in Mesa Verde National Park.
34. Through civil engineering department prepared surveys and plans for future construction of many important roads and trails needed in development of parks, prepared estimates and specifications for present and future construction and improvement work, and supervised the actual construction and improvement of roads, trails, bridges, and other structures under existing park appropriations.
35. Through landscape engineering department effected harmonious construction of new structures in national parks, and planned development of scenic resources along approved modern lines.
36. Adopted standard system of sign marking for roads and trails in the national parks and monuments.
37. Began repaving of the Hermits Rest-Rim Road at the Grand Canyon National Park.
38. Began installation of complete sewer system on the floor of Yosemite Valley, in Yosemite National Park.
39. Expanded the free public automobile camp sites in the various parks to meet the increased demands of motor travel.
40. Arranged with the various public operators for increased accommodations and conveniences for the public in all the national parks, but principally the Yosemite, Yellowstone, Glacier, Sequoia, and Mount Rainier National Parks.
41. In cooperation with Public Health Service made survey of sanitary conditions in Yosemite, General Grant, Sequoia, and Yellowstone National Parks, with a view to installation of adequate sanitation systems.
42. Planted large consignments of fish fry in the lakes and streams of our larger parks, including the Grand Canyon of the Colorado, in cooperation with State fish commissions and the Federal Bureau of Fisheries, in order to maintain and further develop good fishing for the tourists.
43. In addition to above, kept repair and maintenance work in all the parks up to proper and satisfactory standard, in so far as funds permitted.
Rehabilitation work on the old Alaska Northern Railway from Seward (mile 0) to mile 70.
Snowsheds at mile 54 and mile 751 completed and other snowshed construction started.
Long trestle at mile 47.8, approach to loop district, well under way.
Fifteen miles of rail were laid between mile 227 and mile 242; also, 7 miles between mile 358 and mile 365; a total of 22 miles.
Twenty miles of grading were practically completed between mile 264 and mile 284; also a good portion of the grading for the 20 miles between mile 338 and mile 358.
A good portion of clearing was completed between mile 284 and mile 315, a distance of 31 miles, and a distance of 9 miles between miles 329 and 338.
Sections of the line in operation were given necessary maintenance.
Approach to dock at Anchorage completed and dredging being continued to permit of dockage of two boats at the same time.
The following percentages of wagon-road construction were completed during the fiscal year: Miles 264 to 290, 50 per cent; miles 315 to 358, 10 per cent.
This wagon road is being constructed to more expeditiously handle distribution of supplies between ends of steel and to provide a better trail for the carrying of United States mail over the Government railroad from Seward to Fairbanks, a contract having been entered into between the Alaskan Engineering Commission and the Post Office Department for such service.
Line changes were effected which reduced the mileage from Seward to Fairbanks from 471 miles to 467.62 miles.
Approximately 33,000 tons of coal were mined at the two Government mines in the Matanuska field.
Construction work was crippled on the northern division in April and May, 1920, owing to a serious epidemic of"flu"which broke out at Nenana, the northern headquarters of the commission, and the camps south of that point.
The chairman of the Alaskan Engineering Commission reported that about 90 per cent of all persons on the northern division were attacked by the disease.
Work was gradually resumed about May 15.
A shortage of labor has handicapped the work along the whole line.
Since June 30, 1920, and prior to the time this report went to press, grading has been completed and track laid from mile 242 to mile 262, a distance of 20 miles.
The work which remains to be done includes: Completion of rehabilitation from Seward, mile 0 to mile 70; construction of line from mile 262 to mile 358; erection of bridge over Susitna River at mile 264, steel for which is now on the ground; erection steel bridge at Hurricane Gulch, mile 284; erection steel bridge at mile 373; also bridge over the Tanana River at Nenana.
Since construction work started, in 1915, 343 miles of rail have been laid.
This mileage, together with the Alaska Northern Railroad, 70 miles in length, and the Tanana Valley Railroad, 32 miles in length, from Happy Station to Chatanika, both of which roads were purchased by the Government, makes a total of 445 miles of rail under operation.
A map showing progress on the railroad will be found in Appendix E, page 218.
The following table shows the number of matters received and disposed of during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1920, which were docketed or recorded.
It does not, however, account for a very large number of miscellaneous matters of which no formal record was kept.
From the above table it will be noted that out of a total of 9,369 matters referred for the consideration of this office, only 613 were pending at the close of the fiscal year.
This is the smallest total of such undetermined matters for many years as disclosed by the various annual reports.
It is also gratifying to note that while the appeals filed in publicland cases totaled 1,821, as compared with 1,360 during the year ended June 30, 1919, yet the number pending has been further reduced, from 429 to 368.
All matters are now reached in docket order for adjudication within a reasonable time and are disposed of as promptly as is consistent with careful consideration of the questions presented.
At the close of the fiscal year there were also pending in the courts situate in the District of Columbia 33 cases against the Secretary— 12 in the Supreme Court of the United States, 7 in the court of appeals, 14 in the Supreme Court of the District.
During the year 11 actions and suits against the department were filed in the local court.
States Supreme Court, 6 in the court of appeals, 30 in the Supreme Court of the District.
In two cases only were the decisions adverse to the department, and these cases have been removed on appeal to the court of appeals.
In addition, the favorable judgments of the appellate court in two cases, mentioned in last year's report, have become absolute, appeals not having been perfected.
There is also another case in which decision in favor of the Secretary was rendered just before the end of the fiscal year, but in which judgment was not entered until after its close.
One case was argued and submitted but no decision rendered.
These figures do not include interlocutory matters, several in number.
The court of appeals affirmed the judgment of the lower court in the two cases involving the administrative ruling of February 15, 1917 (46 L. D., 32), of which comment was made in last year's report.
In all, there has been a net reduction during the year of 11 cases against the department.
Area of land entered and patented.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1920, is 16,437,491.55 acres, not including 422,984.44 acres embraced in finals not heretofore counted as original disposition of land.
The latter area is constituted as follows: Public auction, 174,499 acres; abandoned military reservations, 6,414.91 acres; cash and private sales, individual claimants and small holding claims, 219,- 498.19 acres; preemption entries, 10,456.56 acres; soldiers' additional homesteads, 12,115.78 acres.
The area of 16,437,491.55 acres is an increase of 4,566,310.05 acres, as compared with the area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 1919.
Of the total area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 8,103,844.81 acres were allowed under the stock-raising homestead act of December 29,1916.
The area patented during the fiscal year is 11,850,401.337 acres, an increase of 1,073,399.988 acres as compared with the fiscal year 1919.
Of the above area 9,239,903.257 acres were patented under the homestead laws, an increase of 927,584.369 acres, not including as homesteads 11,666.546 acres patented as soldiers' additional entries.
Cash receipts and expenditures.
The total cash receipts from the sales of public lands, including fees and commissions ($1,587,060.79), sales of reclamation town sites ($124,147.26), sales of lands and timber in the Oregon & California Railroad grant ($184,168.10), and sales of land and timber in the Coos Bay wagon road grant ($80,811.30), for the fiscal year 1920 were $3,974,979.17.
The total receipts from the sales of Indian lands were $2,063,186.06.
Other receipts aggregated $93,611.18.
The total receipts of this bureau during the fiscal year 1920 were $6,131,776.41.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers and incidental expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1920, were $855,752.18.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys made from the appropriations for surveying the public lands outside of railroad land-grant limits, were $3,364,919.96, leaving a net surplus of $2,766,- 856.45 of receipts over expenditures.
Disbursements from the following special deposit trust funds and reimbursable appropriations are not included in the above figures as receipts or expenditures: From deposits by individuals for surveying the public lands, $67,771.40; from surveying within land grants (reimbursable), $16,781.65; from opening Indian reservations (reimbursable), $6,325.22; from deposits by individuals for resurveys, $745.47; from deposits for surveys of private lands, $601.82; and from surveying and allotting Indian reservations (reimbursable), $84,517.77.
The field service.
As the result of investigations in the field $131,342.06 was collected and turned into the Treasury; of which amount $35,519.62 was in settlement of timber-trespass cases, $13,852.68 from timber sales, and $81,969.76 recovered through civil and criminal suits instituted by the United States; in addition to which there has been turned into the Treasury $5,767.11 royalty on coal mined during the past year from a leased tract in Colorado.
As a result of field investigations 137,250 acres have been restored to the public domain.
Of this acreage 49,090 acres were restored to the open range by the abatement of unlawful inclosures without suit.
Special agents have investigated and reported on 20,865 cases, 3,794 of which were adversely and 17,071 favorably reported.
Three hundred and thirty-two hearings in Government contests have been held.
Civil suits in 64 cases were recommended to the Department of Justice as the result of investigation.
One hundred and nine were tried in court, of which 82 were won and 27 lost.
As the result of the successful prosecution of these suits, $79,868.76 was recovered and 43,780 acres were restored to the public domain, of which 40,345 acres had been unlawfully inclosed.
Of the criminal cases tried during the year 36 resulted in conviction, under which there were 11 prison sentences imposed and fines amounting to $2,101 paid.
The commissioner calls attention to the growing necessities of the field work, especially in connection with the operation of the new leasing law, which can not be handled properly without an addition to the present appropriation.
Oil-land claims.
The status of the withdrawn oil lands in California embraced in mineral applications for patent, and the unentered lands involved in suits by the Government, is shown in a carefully prepared tabulated statement; and a summary is furnished relative to the status in Wyoming with respect to pending claims and applications for title to oil lands.
Oil contracts.
Outside of these agreements, under special contract, two 80-acre tracts in the Grass Creek oil fields, Wyoming, are operated, under which the total escrow deposits at the end of the fiscal year are $2,857,802.46.
In California, at the end of the fiscal year, there were 38 contracts outstanding, under which, up to June 30, 1920, the escrow deposits amounted to $1,795,136.94.
The total escrow deposits under all agreements amount to $9,912,398.40.
Applications under relief sections of leasing law.
Since the enactment of the leasing law of February 25, 1920 (Public, No. 146), 28 applications for lease or permit under the relief sections 18, 18a, and 19, embracing 10,331.01 acres, have been filed, 20 of these covering lands in Wyoming, 7 in California, and 1 in New Mexico.
Ferry," or“Caddo Lake," oil lands in Louisiana.
Seventeen of the 18 suits in which the Government obtained favorable decisions in the United States District Court, Western District of Louisiana, mentioned in the last annual report, are now pending on appeal before the United States circuit court of appeals, the remaining suit having been dismissed on the motion of the appellant, which, in effect, gives the Government possession of the oil production and a money verdict for $1,577.24 and costs.
Four new suits have been instituted to recover possession of 160 acres of land described as the SE.
1 sec. 9, T. 21 N., R. 16 W., Louisiana, and to obtain an accounting for oil extracted therefrom to the alleged value of $317,919.38.
Arkansas "sunk and lake lands."—The title, which has heretofore been quieted in the Government as the result of litigation that was pending in the Federal courts for several years, is being transferred to private ownership, so that within a comparatively short time the United States will have no further interest in these lands.
March 11, 1920, a decree was entered in the United States district court in favor of the Government quieting title to an area comprising 22,514 acres, conservatively valued at $1,000,000, locally known as "Big Lake," situated just south of the Missouri boundary line in Mississippi County, Ark.
On June 7, 1920, the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas directed a decree be entered favorable to the Government, quieting title to approximately 625 acres within the area known as"Bagwell's Lake."
Two bills of complaint have been filed in additional suits, involving lands in the area locally known as "Goldens Lake" and "Youngs Lake," Mississippi County, Ark., embracing in the aggregate something over 5,000 acres, the alleged value of which was placed at $400,000.
Summarizing the results accomplished under this litigation, the commissioner states that the Government has won 14 suits quieting title in the United States to approximately 60,000 acres of so-called sunk lands and 44,000 acres of so-called lake lands, conservatively valued at $5,200,000, and recovered the aggregate sum of $50,000 for the value of timber cut in trespass from these lands.
Surveys.
Attention is called to the fact that this fiscal year marks the tenth anniversary of the inauguration of the direct system of surveys, which has operated to solve many difficulties in securing the accurate and prompt survey of our public lands.
During the fiscal year the returns of surveys and resurveys, amounting to 12,478,715 acres, have been accepted.
A special drive is reported during the past year to overcome the accumulated field and office work in connection with fragmentary surveys, which are now counted as current.
The practical completion of the surveys in railroad grants during the present season is expected.
An interesting summary of the reports from the offices of the surveyors general is included in the commissioner's report, from which it appears that the work in these offices is now current, a result somewhat due to the statute allowing the commissioner to detail clerks from one office to another as the special needs of the service require.
Tract-book notations.
The total number of tract-book notations for the present year was 396,324, as compared to 376,151 during the previous year.
This includes 52,024 appeals, 1,351 Indian allotments, 41,693 final certificates, and 50,792 original entries.
The number of plats posted was 1,398.
Homestead and kindred entries.
During the fiscal year the section that handles this class of work received new cases to the extent of 86,684, which, added to pending cases, made up a total of 99,539 cases, of which final disposition was made of 93,015 cases, leaving at the end of the year pending 6,524 cases.
Stock-raising homesteads.
At the end of the fiscal year 36,000 stock-raising homesteads have been allowed.
Eighty-two thousand petitions for designation have been received in the Geological Survey, of which 67,000 have been acted upon and a total area designated of more than 74,000,000 acres.
Stock driveways.
Based on field investigation there have been withdrawn under section 10 of the act of September 29, 1916, during the fiscal year, 2,406,815 acres; the total gross area included in driveway withdrawals at the close of the fiscal year is 8,898,258 acres.
Soldiers' additional homestead rights.
The number of new applications received in the past year was 327, as against 369 the previous year, the office finally disposing of 404 cases by final adjudication or the issuance of patent, as against 347 cases the previous year.
The commissioner furnishes a careful analysis of this line of work in his office, and renews his recommendation of the previous year of some legislation limiting the time within which these rights may be presented for adjudication.
Town-site, town-lot, and kindred entries.
Sixteen town-site and kindred entries were sold during the last fiscal year, all of which have been approved for patenting.
There were pending at the beginning of the fiscal year 69 lot entries; there were received 1,673 lot entries; making a total of 1,742, of which 1,648 entries have been approved for patenting, leaving 94 entries pending at the end of the year.
The public sale of lots during the fiscal year, exclusive of Alaska, realized the sum of $150,941.50.
Among the Alaska town sites, Wrangell was finally closed out under the new regulations by a trustee appointed from the Alaska field division.
In the case of Petersburg town site, Alaska, the trustee collected $9,377.50, disbursed for expenses $7,690.15, leaving on hand $1,687.35, which sum was turned over to the city treasury of Petersburg.
Rights of way.
Only about one-half as many applications for railroad rights of way were received during the year as in the year previous.
Irrigation development, on the other hand, appears to be growing steadily.
Taking the right-of-way work as a whole, excepting hydroelectric, 237 applications were received and awaiting action on July 1, 1919.
During the year 502 were received, as against 430 the previous year, of which 497 were disposed of, as against 466 the year before, leaving 247 pending, of which number 134 were awaiting compliance with calls of the office.
Forfeiture cases.
Two hundred and thirteen cases of this kind were docketed, as against 185 the year previous, making a-total of 418 docketed cases; of these, 58 were canceled and 79 otherwise disposed of, making a total of 137 finally closed, as against 105 the year previous.
Fourteen grants of rights of way were canceled by judicial decree as a result of suits previously recommended by this office.
Thirty suits were recommended during the year and have been instituted.
State irrigation districts.
This office has not found it practicable thus far to recommend the approval of any irrigation districts not depending upon the United States Reclamation Service for water supply.
During the year applications aggregating 53,072 acres were received, making the entire area now pending action 184,228 acres.
Private irrigation projects.
During the past year 72 new reports and 16 supplemental reports have been received, as against 61 new and 28 supplemental reports in 1919, as the result of investigations of private irrigation enterprises and State irrigation districts upon which claimants and applicants under the desert-land laws were dependent for their water supplies, making a total of 1,066 projects reported since the adoption of the regulations of September 30, 1910 (39 L. D., 253).
There were also received from the Director of the Geological Survey 19 reports, made in response to requests of this office for information bearing upon the feasibility of these projects.
Reports on 106 irrigation companies and districts have been disposed of, as against 92 last year.
In 65 cases, affecting 30'0 desertland claims, the conclusions reached were in favor of the recognition of the project, as against 47 cases, involving 288 entries, in 1919; in 15 cases, affecting about 50 entries and applications, the concluclusions were adverse, while 26 cases were closed without any definite conclusion, due to the fact that no pending claims were now involved.
Hydroelectric power.
During the past year 10 permits were granted under the act of February 15, 1909 (31 Stat., 790); easements for transmission lines granted in 4 cases, and payments were made as compensation for the use of the lands under control of the Interior Department, in pursuance of permits and grants for hydroelectric development and power transmission aggregating $7,443.30.
Carey Act.
Very full summary of transactions under this act is presented in the commissioner's report practically from the date of its passage down to the present, showing that during this period 889,000 acres have been patented thereunder.
Desert lands.
The office during the year received 8,625 applications and entries of all descriptions, as against 7,324 last year; it disposed of 8,650 cases, as against 6,521 last year.
It has now pending 7,487 cases, as against 8,907 cases pending June 30, 1919.
Reclamation homesteads.
Original homestead entries in reclamation projects: Nine hundred and forty-four received, 662 allowed, 76 canceled, and additional evidence called for in 455 cases.
Final homestead entries in reclamations projects: Eight hundred and thirty-eight received, as against 732 last year, and 781 approved for patent, as against 653 last year; additional evidence called for in 95 cases.
Stock-watering reservoirs.
Two hundred and twenty-three reservoir declaratory statements were received during the year, which, together with those on hand July 1, 1919, made a total of 419 cases before the office; of this number, 8 were approved, 84 canceled, 147 otherwise disposed of, leaving pending 180, June 30, 1920.
State selections and State grants.
There were received during the past year 587,763.93 acres of indemnity school-land selections and 27,775.67 acres of selections under grants in quantity, for specific purposes, a total of 615,539.60 acres.
During the year 1,317,009.98 acres of indemnity school lands and 167,751.92 acres of quantitygrant lands were conveyed-to the States.
In addition, 58,435.61 acres of indemnity school land and 4,729 acres of quantity-grant selections were rejected and canceled, the total acreage adjudicated being 1,547,897.80 acres.
There were conveyed to the States, with reservations of mineral deposits, 48,291.17 acres, and 35,179.06 acres under cooperative agreements for the exchange of school-section lands within the boundaries of national forests.
School-land grant to the State of Washington.
The commissioner notes the decision by the Supreme Court of the State of Washington in the case of Thompson against Savidge (188 Pac. Rep., 397), by which the pending controversy between the Government and the State as to the adjustment of the grant to the State is terminated.
Grant of school lands to the State of Florida.
The adjustment of this grant has been made a special study during the past year, in which it is found (1) that the State had received excess indemnity lands to the amount of 7,888.25 acres; (2) that exclusive of such overdrafts, there remained unsatisfied losses to the State school grant amounting to 4,977.85 acres; the State having made good its overdrafts by further assignments of unsatisfied losses the adjudication of the grant will now proceed.
Railroad grants and selections.
Railroad and wagon road selections were received during the year to the amount of 1,710,915.82 acres, as compared with 529,900.03 acres in 1919.
There were certified and patented 527,640.85 acres, as compared with 632,284.40 acres patented in 1919.
New Orleans Pacific Railway lands.
Since the decision in the United States Supreme Court in the case of Josephine Brown et al. against the New Orleans Pacific Railway Co. (248 U. S., 507), 165 applications in conflict with the grant have been filed in which hearings before the local offices have been ordered in 54 cases, with 101 remaining for further consideration.
Settlers on railroad lands in Montana.
Practically all of the claims arising under the act of February 28, 1919 (40 Stat., 1204), have been adjusted and closed.
In all, 74 claims were presented, of which 3 were rejected as not within the terms of the act.
The company executed relinquishments in 47 cases, embraced in 14 lists, covering 13,905.38 acres.
It refused to relinquish in 24 cases involving 7,040.71 acres.
The Dalles military road adjustment.
At the end of the last fiscal year there had been approved to the company, in further satisfaction of its grant, 16,972.73 acres, within the primary limits, for which acreage patent was issued July 24, 1919.
Coos Bay wagon road lands.
The lands reconveyed to the United States under the act of February 26, 1919 (40 Stat., 1117), aggregating about 93,000 acres, have been examined in the field during the past year for the purpose of determining their character as agricultural or timber lands; while the provisions of this act directing payment of taxes on the reconveyed lands have been carried into effect, a total of $547,224.10 have been paid to Coos and Douglas Counties Oreg.
The regulations of September 15, 1917, relating to the sale of timber on isolated tracts in the Oregon and California grant were extended to the reconveyed Coos Bay wagon road lands, and one sale has been made thereunder of 560 acres, including 13,650,000 feet, board measure, for which $30,793.92 were received.
The commissioner notes the conclusion of the suit against the Southern Oregon Co. in consonance with the terms of the act of February 26, 1919, authorizing the dismissal of the proceedings and the reconveyance of the lands involved to the United States.
Oregon & California Railroad lands.
Proceedings to determine the mineral or nonmineral character of approximately 55,000 acres are yet pending, and as to these lands it can not be known to what extent the revestment act will apply.
Hence, pending action thereon no payments of taxes claimed on behalf of the counties can be made.
During the year timber on isolated tracts to the extent of 3,464.39 acres was sold, for which the sum of $138,519.76 was received.
One restoration to entry of lands classified as agricultural was made approximately covering 360,000 acres.
Under this restoration 50,837.82 acres had been entered at the close of the fiscal year.
Under the act of May 31, 1918, authorizing the exchange of revested timber lands for lands of similar character in private ownership, 17 applications were denied, 11 cases are pending awaiting action, 2 of which have been published under the regulations, and 1 application for exchange has been submitted for approval preliminary to the final consummation of exchange.
Swamp and overflowed lands.
New applications for official identification were received to the extent of 2,871.10 acres and during this period the claim to 29,996.04 acres was rejected and 13,710.38 acres approved for allowance.
Patents were issued to Arkansas, 40 acres; California, 11,514.94 acres; Louisiana, 2,101.24 acres; Michigan, 6.57 acres; Mississippi, 47.53 acres.
Private land claims.
A very full review of this line of work is presented by the commissioner with the suggestion of further legislation looking toward the protection of titles having their derivation under foreign grants.
Abandoned military reservations.
The commissioner reports a number of disposals under the act of July 5, 1884 (23 Stat., 103), and the act of August 23, 1894 (29 Stat., 491), notably in Bayside, N. J., Batton Island, Fla., Camp Three Forks Owyhee, Ore. and Idaho Fort Grant, Ariz., and Gig Harbor, Wash.
Date Creek Reservation, Ariz., embracing 6,370.83 acres originally, was opened to homestead entry March 27, 1920.
Indian allotments.
Applications for the allotment of public lands have been accepted in 1,359 cases during the year, and 459 have been finally rejected.
There were issued to Indians under the general allotment act 1,853 trust patents of the total area of 181,703.545 acres.
There were also issued to Indian trust patentees or transferees 8,185 patents in fee conveying a total of 1,138,023.081 acres.
Chippewa logging.
One million two hundred and thirty-nine thousand-five hundred and sixty feet were cut under contract, for which $6,114.86 were received; 546,810 feet were cut in trespass, for which $6,612.87 were collected; the contractors paid $13,098.66 in interest charges for extensions of time within which to complete their contracts.
Minnesota drainage.
One thousand and two entries were approved for patent during the past year, covering an area of approximately 160,320 acres; a total of about 927,240 acres have been patented under this law as cash purchases.
Public sale of Indian lands.
At Lemmon, S. Dak., 21,798.96 acres were sold for $60,041.85, at approximately 75 per cent over the appraised value.
At Timber Lake, S. Dak., 174,285 acres, appraised at $428,091, were sold for $574,229.
Private claims within Indian pueblos.
The commissioner furnishes an outline of the procedure heretofore had under the act of July 22, 1853 (10 Stat., 309), for the identification of Indian pueblos.
Extensions of time to make payments.
Attention is directed to the several acts of Congress and action taken thereunder authorizing the extension of time to make payment on lands theretofore entered.
Lieu selections for lands in Indian reservations.
There were patented during the year 20,475.76 acres, embraced in 15 selections, leaving pending 149 selections, covering 485,675.28 acres.
Mining claims.
The total acreage included in mineral entries approved during the year was 52,600, aggregating a purchase money payment of $161,369.50.
There were 85 contests received during the year, 108 disposed of, leaving 89 pending at the end of the year.
Alaska coal lands.
During the year a part of the Cook Inlet coal field was surveyed and divided into 19 leasing blocks and one lease awarded.
An additional block containing 565 acres, and designated as No. 26, was surveyed in the Nenana field, for which a lease has been awarded.
One application to lease 2,040 acres of land in the Bering River field and an application to lease 1,080 acres in the Matanuska field have been received and are now pending for action.
Potash lands.
One potash lease covering 980 acres of the Searles Lake deposit was issued during the year, making a total of 10 leases outstanding for the Searles Lake land, and one lease of lands in Sweetwater County, Wyo.
A total of 143 applications for potashprospecting permits were received, on which 61 permits were granted.
Total potash permits issued during the year, 162.
A patent was granted to the Utah Salduro Co. for an area of 30,658 acres of land in Salt Lake Desert, for which the purchase price was $76,645.
Mineral leasing law.
The passage of this statute is of too recent occurrence for the production of any statistics that can serve a useful purpose, although it is known that a large number of applications to secure oil-land leases and permits have been filed in the district land offices, and the increase of work incidental thereto has called for a special organization in the General Land Office to handle this work.
National forests.
There are now 152 national forests, embracing 180,299,776 acres, of which a little over 86 per cent is public land.
The net increase in national forest area during the year is 6,038,383 acres.
There are now in national forests 10 rights of way for wagon roads and 926 administrative sites, embracing 214,958 acres.
Forest lieu selections.
The commissioner furnishes a very full analysis of the several questions that remain undetermined before the department, with a statement as to the number of cases that will be affected in each instance.
Withdrawals and restorations.
During the year past 5,394,799 acres of public lands were withdrawn or placed in a state of reservation under the various acts applicable thereto, and 4,199,647 acres theretofore withdrawn have been restored.
These withdrawals and restorations are duly classified in the commissioner's report.
Restorations and openings under public resolution No. 29.—Since the passage of the resolution of February 14, 1920, conferring a preference right of entry upon qualified ex-service men of the recent war for a period of 60 days following the restoration and opening of lands 718,414 acres have been restored.
Contests.
In the year that is now closed the office disposed of 730 litigated cases, exclusive of mineral contests, and 2,624 on default.
Repayment.
Under the several statutes authorizing repayments there were stated during the last year 1,426 accounts, allowing repayment of $140,292.94, and during said period 419 claims for repayment were denied.
This number of claims allowed includes 63 accounts allowing repayment of $9,404.78 received in connection with sale of various Indian reservations and repaid from Indian trust funds.
Patents.
A statement is submitted showing the number of patents issued and area patented, by fiscal years, from 1911 to 1920.
The whole number of patents during this period is 618,430, which conveyed 118,157,582.24 acres.
Certified copies.
The steady annual increase of calls for certified copies of patent records emphasizes the fact that many thousands of these evidences of title have never been recorded in the county records.
The entire output of photographic work for the year, including copies of patent records, letter books, papers, plats, tract books, abstracts, etc., approximated 110,000 pages.
Land Service Bulletin.
Attention is directed to the usefulness of this monthly mimeographic publication, established March 1, 1917, in the General Land Office as a medium of direct communication between the different branches of the land service, and the inclusion of an item for printing this publication in our next estimate is recommended.
Important public-land legislation.
A summary of the important public-land laws enacted during the administrative period embracing the years 1913 to 1920, inclusive, is submitted and the fact noted that by such legislation many radical changes have been effected in our public-land policies.
Administrative record.
Significant achievements of the General Land Office during the administrative period covered by the years 1913 to 1920, inclusive, are embraced in a summarized statement.
Compensation of registers and receivers.
A recommendation for legislative action increasing the compensation of district land officers is submitted by the commissioner, together with a full analysis of statutes now governing this matter.
Personnel and salaries.
Under this head the commissioner submits a study of the statutory salaries in the Washington office of the land service, with the conclusion that if the situation is not improved it will result in the inability of the office to properly handle the work it is called upon to perform.
Indian progress.
Attention is directed to various evidences of Indian progress under the plan pursued of allotting land in severalty, conducting schools and hospitals for mental and physical betterment, and providing guidance in the productive use of the soil, and the Indian's industrial advancement is mentioned as especially significant.
Their individual funds on deposit have increased in the last eight years in excess of $20,000,000.
During that period they have expended for homes, barns, and modern farm implements $18,000,000 and have added $13,000,000 to their capital live stock.
The Indian's transformation from a game hunter and wanderer to a settled landholder and home builder is everywhere evident.
Nearly 37,000 Indian farmers are cultivating over three-quarters of a million acres; 47,000 are engaged in stock raising, and their live stock is worth close to $38,000,000.
Their income for 1919 from the sale of crops and live stock was approximately $14,000,000.
The Indians are dependable wage workers.
Their annual earnings in public and private service exceed $3,000,000.
Their number receiving rations and supplies not paid for in labor has decreased one-half in the last seven years.
No backward lure.
Whatever encourages the Indians to array themselves in warlike costumes of the past, to participate in old-time dances, and the like, must in a measure emphasize the habit and customs of long ago, which if the Indian is to assume the burdens and enjoy the privileges of citizenship should disappear.
Moreover, such exhibitions tend to give the public a wrong idea of existing conditions by featuring the Indian as delighting in the atmosphere of the past and in exhibitions of his uncivilized state at the expense and in the discouragement of the progressive, industrious Indian, whose children are in school, whose wife is a good housekeeper, and who is applying himself to the industrial activities which are in harmony with the white man's civilization.
So that, everything considered, I must believe that the best interests of the Indians everywhere demand that they be not attracted away from their homes, the care of their stock and crops, and their general domestic duties to the transient return at some distant point of old-time performances which tend to justify the too-frequent charge that they are not progressive and that little benefit has come from the Government's guardianship.
Education.
The work of Indian education is functioned in a chain of schools throughout the Indian country adapted to the particular needs of the race.
But it is the policy to encourage the attendance of Indian children in the State public schools as far as possible, thus merging them into the same educational processes as that of the whites.
As a result the attendance since 1915 has been diminishing in Government Indian schools and increasing in State schools.
Because of this shifting of enrollment it was practicable last year to discontinue 12 Indian boarding schools and a number of Government day schools, which, however, should effect no immediate curtailment of expense, as there are localities, chiefly in the Southwest, where public schools are not, and probably for some time will not, be available and where the school population of the Indians is not sufficiently provided for.
There will remain for many years a large Indian population which will require the aid of the Government in those educational facilities which are the very beginning of their fitness for citizenship.
Effort was made during the year to awaken greater interest among school employees in such fundamentals of education as moral training, more thorough and systematic instruction, especially in industrial class work, and an improvement in social morale among school workers in furtherance of better organization and as an exemplary influence among pupils.
Field service and salaries.
The Indian field service is still seriously embarrassed by war and post-war conditions.
It has been, and is still, impossible to keep many important positions filled from civilservice eligibles.
There is a shrinkage below normal for nurses of nearly 60 per cent; for physicians, 20 per cent; matrons, 12 per cent; forest assistants, 33 per cent; farmers, 30 per cent; and for teachers, disciplinarians, carpenters, cooks, bakers, and engineers, 25 per cent.
Employees required for these positions are all very essential to the efficient administering of Indian affairs, and many of them are expected to be capable of giving class instruction in the mechanic and domestic arts, in matters of health, and in agriculture and stock raising.
Trained and skillful service can not be procured or retained when it can secure better remuneration in other Government departments and in outside enterprises.
Indian enployment.
The value of vocational training in Indian schools is reflected in the increased efficiency of pupils, many of whom are taking their places in the business and industrial life of their community side by side with the whites.
The annual colony of student workers was maintained in the beet fields of Colorado and vicinity from June to October, 1919.
Thousands of Indians are employed on farms and fruit fields adjacent to reservations.
In Box Butte County, Nebr., the work of one community of Indians will yield 700,000 bushels of potatoes.
A steadily increasing number are being employed in motor factories, railway activities, and in clerical positions both in and out of the Indian service.
Farming.
The Indians are rapidly increasing their interest and acreage in agriculture.
Last year 36,459 cultivated 762,126 acres of land, producing crops worth $11,037,589, as compared with 558,503 acres in 1912, producing crops worth $3,250,288, and their use of modern machinery and methods is now noteworthy.
Experimentation and demonstration work is quite generally conducted on farms of the Indians, and the development of the long-staple "Pima" cotton promises wonderful returns in the Southwest, where one Indian realized nearly $6,000 from 12 acres of this cotton.
Indian fairs have proven a great stimulus to Indian agricultural interests, and have increased from 12 in 1912 to about 70 last year.
Reimbursable funds.
The use of repayment funds has materially aided Indian industrial progress.
During the year large credits were applied to previous appropriations of such funds.
At the Mescalero Reservation the,total indebtedness of individual Indians has been liquidated.
At Crow, less than $600 of $80,000 loaned from tribal funds remains unpaid.
At Flathead, two-thirds of about $13,000 borrowed was paid back from February 1 to April 30.
Leasing.
The leasing of Indian lands beyond that which the Indians themselves can cultivate is now an established policy which brings good returns in revenue, besides additions to the general food supplies, and develops individual responsibility, as the Indians wherever competent are permitted to manage their own leases and handle the funds so derived.
Approximately 40,000 leases covering 4,500,000 acres of Indian lands were executed during the year, affording rentals to the value of over $8,000,000.
New regulations providing for leases to the highest bidder brought on one reservation an increase of 52 per cent over the old system of renting.
Under regulations in accordance with recent legislation, a fee of $5 charged for each lease or sublease will defray administrative expense for such work.
Stock raising.
A period of extreme drought in certain parts of the Northwest, followed by a winter of unusual length and severity, resulted in some losses of stock and necessitated a reduction of herds to prevent further loss.
A comprehensive review of the Indians as live-stock producers indicates remarkable gains during recent years in the handling of live-stock ranges and the development of their carrying capacity, together with the financial success of various tribal herds of sheep and cattle, and the active interest now taken by many Indians in the improvement and better care of their stock and in up-to-date methods of marketing it.
Health.
Such epidemics as have appeared among the Indians during the year have been successfully controlled.
Tuberculosis and trachoma constitute the most obstinate disease problems.
The systematic régime of treatment and preventative measures has materially reduced these afflictions in the schools, but facilities are inadequate to eradicate them among the adult Indians.
The shortage in nurses and physicians is seriously felt, but the corps of health workers, supplemented by self-sacrificing field matrons and other employees, is accomplishing splendid results, and the general health of the Indians is better to-day than at any time in their history.
Forestry.
The year shows large sales of timber on a number of reservations in Oregon, Montana, Washington, and New Mexico, and prices for stumpage have ranged the highest heretofore received.
The Neopit operations on the Menominee Reservation show the highest annual profit yet attained, and the white and Norway pine lumber, manufactured almost entirely by Indian labor at the Red Lake Reservation, was sold for $38.50 per thousand feet, mill run No. 5 and better, f.
Decisive action has been taken to increase efficiency of fire control Forest valuation and land classification are being extended, and complete topographic maps of the Menominee and Quinaielt Reservations were issued.
Oklahoma Indians.
The report includes an article of recent publication containing much historical and administrative in'formation regarding the Indians in Oklahoma, who constitute nearly one-third of their race in the United States and about five-sixths of whom are members of the Five Civilized Tribes.
Matters of citizenship, the reform of procedure in probating Indian estates, industrial development—particularly in the mineral products of oil, gas, and zinc—and general agricultural and educational conditions are presented with evident fidelity to the facts as established by official records and in such form as to interest the general reader.
Osage oil and gas leases.
There are on the Osage Reservation in Oklahoma nearly 6,000 oil wells, producing from 2 to 1,800 barrels per day each, with a daily total production of about 50,000 barrels.
During the year three oil-lease sales were held, offering at each sale approximately 200 quarter-section tracts.
Approximately 98,866 acres were leased at these sales for a bonus consideration of $12,- 110,100.
Oil leases embracing 540,866 acres are included in lands leased for gas.
In addition to bonus, a royalty is paid on oil of 16 per cent and upward, and the same on gas based on a value of 18 cents per 1,000 cubic feet for gas at the well.
The Osage Indians desire an extension of the mineral trust period for 25 years from 1931, and legislation to that effect is pending which provides for setting aside 3 per cent of the royalty accruing to the Indians for permanent roads and bridges in Osage County.
Nearly $18;000,000 were received by Osage Indians from oil and gas during the fiscal years.
Five Civilized Tribes.
The superintendent's receipts and disbursements for the year were nearly $48,000,000, the largest of any year in the history of that office.
Approximately $2,000,000 of individual moneys were expended for maintenance, farms, buildings, live stock, and equipment.
Restriction against alienation of individual allotted lands was removed from about 210,000 acres, the maximum figure since 1908.
There were 3,590 oil and gas leases disposed of during the year.
The annual production of oil and gas was lower, but the income was larger than for the previous year.
Nearly $4,800,000 in bonuses and royalties were received by the restricted Indians.
Federal income tax in excess of $350,000 was paid by 242 restricted Indians.
The Cherokee and Seminole tribal governments have been abolished.
Oil and gas outside the Five Civilized Tribes and Osage Nation.
The widespread search for oil and gas has resulted in leases for these minerals in practically every State where restricted Indian lands are situated.
On the Kiowa Reservation auction sales of oil and gas leases are held about every two months, and the Indians have thus received the best prices obtainable in cash bonuses for their leases.
On the Otoe Reservation 1,630 acres were leased for oil and gas during the year, making a total of more than 25,000 acres under lease at the close of the fiscal year.
On the Kaw Reservation there has been no production, but prospecting is active, and the revenue of the Kaw Indians exceeded $50,000 for oil and gas leases last year.
Probate work in eastern Oklahoma.
Harmonious relations now exist between the judges of the county courts and the probate attorneys who look after the protection of the interests of restricted Indians in matters of guardianship, administration of estates, and the rights of minor children in the probate courts of the State.
Indians frequently, without consulting probate attorneys, execute instruments relative to their lands for an inadequate consideration and later, upon finding they were wronged, appeal to these attorneys for help.
These appeals are heeded.
Irrigation.
The progressive development of Indian irrigation projects forcibly demonstrates the advantage of artificial application of water to arid land.
Slightly over $3,000,000 have already been expended in irrigation work on the Yakima Reservation, Wash., while the gross value of crops raised on the irrigation projects within this reservation during the past year aggregate $10,000,000.
On the Fort.
Hall Reservation, Idaho, where the area under cultivation is. considerably smaller and the climate and soil conditions less favorable, the value of the crops raised during the year exceeded $1,000,000.
This is more than the total cost of the project to date, including operation and maintenance.
It is reported that one farmer on the Yakima Reservation averaged $1,000 per acre for his potato crop, the selling price being $65 per ton.
Later the market price for this product reached as high as $180 per ton.
The shortage of rainfall in the Northwest affected all irrigation projects last year.
The Blackfoot Reservoir proved sufficient to meet needed demands, and in the face of drought handicaps the Uintah Basin, Utah, produced over $2,000,000 worth of crops by irrigation.
Purchase and transportation of supplies.
Lack of sufficient funds to carry on all activities on account of the abnormal cost of supplies, including their transportation, necessarily curtailed other projects in favor of the purchase of food, clothing, fuel, and other strict necessities.
Field estimates on all classes of supplies were pared to actual needs, and yet, due to market conditions, it required often a second, and sometimes a third, advertisement before purchase could be made.
In spite of all these handicaps when the year closed it was found that but little that was needed was left unbought.
The increased cost of material and labor particularly affected the construction of buildings in the service.
In many instances the best.
Suppression of the liquor traffic.
Reports from a number of the Indian reservations show that since the coming of State and national prohibition it is very much more difficult for Indians .
Between the passage of the national prohibition law and its going into effect, some of the liquor interests resorted to the trick of spreading information relative to the manufacture of alcoholic liquors, which resulted in a flooding of the country with illicit whisky stills, etc.
The Indian country has suffered a share of the resultant violations of the law, and many moonshine stills have been raided and destroyed and the operators prosecuted wherever practicable.
Unsolicited testimonials from State officials show marked progress in the law-abiding qualities of the Indians.
Citizenship for Indian soldiers and sailors.
Recognition of the service of Indian soldiers and sailors who served in the recent war with Germany has been obtained by the passage by Congress of an act providing that Indians who served in the Military or Naval Establishments of the United States, and who have been honorably discharged, may be granted citizenship by courts of competent jurisdiction.
Removal of restrictions and land sales.
Under the "Declaration of Policy" of April 17, 1917, 1,826 patents involving 659,058 acres were issued, and 4,400 patents involving 598,987 acres were issued on proof of competency of allottee or heirs.
The total number of patents issued on the recommendations of competency commissions from July 1, 1919, to June 30, 1920, was 722, covering 119,358 acres.
Of the lands of original allottees, usually designated as noncompetent, 1,006 tracts involving 146,047 acres were sold for $3,566,816, being an average price of $25 plus per acre.
Of inherited Indian lands there were sold 1,000 tracts involving 155,794 acres for $4,007,588, an average price of $25.72 plus per acre.
Throughout the Indian country there has been an unusual demand for lands, and prices have risen accordingly.
The advance has affected particularly Indian lands in Nebraska, the Dakotas, and Oklahoma.
Where appraisements in 1914 averaged on one reservation approximately $40 per acre, whole allotments have brought on competitive bids prices running over $300 per acre.
Allotments.
During the year allotment work continued on the Gila River Reservation embracing about 30,000 acres, and allotments to between 500 and 600 Indians on the Blackfeet Reservation are in progress.
On the Umatilla Reservation schedules are prepared for 755 allotments embracing 60,703 acres.
On the public domain 737 allotments comprising 106,537 acres were made.
The period of trust was extended by order of the President on allotments made to the Omaha Indians in Nebraska; to the Siletz Indians in Oregon; to the Klamath River Indians on the Hoopa Valley Reservation in California; to the Nez Perce Indians in Idaho; to the Round Valley Indians in California; and to the Indians of various tribes residing on the public domain wherein the period of trust would otherwise expire during the calendar year 1920.
Individual Indian moneys.
Unusually large sums of these funds have been disbursed during the year.
Indians without obtaining specific authority from the office, and disburse directly from the lease roll not to exceed $200 per annum to incompetent adults when their needs require; and to make expenditures from the account of adult Indians in the construction and repair of houses, barns, wells, fences, etc., and the purchase of agricultural implements, live stock, and seed.
Probating estates of deceased Indians and approval of wills.
Five thousand three hundred and sixty-eight heirship cases were finally disposed of; 4,810 of these cases were those on which trust patents had issued; 322 were those on which restricted patents had issued; 121 were personal property cases; 115 were inherited interest cases.
One hundred and sixty-two wills were approved and 60 disapproved.
Miscellaneous matters.
A dispute of long standing between the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico and the encroaching whites and Mexican squatters who have located on Indian lands gives promise of adjustment through a plan whereby the Department of Justice has taken charge of litigation suggested to remove the squatters and quiet title in the Indians.
In addition, a draft of legislation has been prepared which, if enacted by Congress, will place the affairs of the Indians in New Mexico under more direct governmental supervision and prevent further alienation or leasing of their lands without departmental consent.
The progress of the Florida Seminoles is encouraging, notwithstanding their prejudice against the whites; 12,400 acres of their land have been fenced and are available for grazing.
An industrial center has been established, and as soon as funds are available a small herd of cattle will be purchased, to be resold to individual Indians on the reimbursable plan, as they become competent and interested.
Congress, by the act approved June 3, 1920 (public, No. 237, 66th Cong.), authorized the Sioux Tribe of Indians, or any band or bands thereof, to take their claims of whatsoever nature against the United States to the Court of Claims for a hearing and final determination.
This act provides also that any other tribe or bands of Indians might, in the judgment of the court, be joined in the suit, which is to be filed within a period of five years after the date of the passage of the act.
The claims of the Great Sioux Nation are of long standing and are based on the provisions of certain treaties and agreements with the Government, which these Indians allege have not been fulfilled.
The passage of the law here cited was urged as a just measure for finally disposing of these old claims before the many witnesses cognizant of the facts pass away.
With respect to roads and highways, the local authorities in the Indian country have been most active in projecting new roads and in straightening and reducing grades of roads already established across Indian lands, and at least 50 permits for the opening of public highways have been issued therefor.
Good roads are essential to the industrial welfare and progress of the Indians, and every effort has been made during the last year to provide improved facilities of this nature, so far as available funds would permit.
In connection with the usual Fourth of July celebrations there were held on each of the Sioux reservations memorial ceremonies by the Indians in honor of the returned Sioux soldiers and sailors who served in the World War, and in memory of those who lost their lives in such service.
Number of pensioners.
There were on the roll at the end of the fiscal year 592,190 names, a net loss of 32,237 from the total of 624,427 on the roll at the beginning of the year.
The number of Civil War soldiers on the roll June 30, 1919, was 271,391, and on June 30, 1920, 243,520, showing a decrease of 27,871.
The number of deaths of Civil War soldiers in 1920 was 27,871, as against 27,703 in 1919.
The number of Civil War widows on the roll June 30, 1919, was 293,244, and on June 30, 1920, 290,100, showing a decrease of 3,144.
The deaths of widows, minor children, and dependents in 1920 numbered 21,752, as against 20,089 in 1919.
The highest number of Civil War soldiers on the roll was in 1898, when there were 745,822.
The highest number of Civil War widows on the roll was in 1912, when there were 304,373.
Of the War of 1812, there were surviving on June 30, 1920, 71 widows.
Of the War with Mexico, there were on the roll June 30, 1920, 148 survivors and 2,423 widows.
Of the War with Spain, the total number of original claims allowed by the bureau is 41,427.
The number on the roll June 30, 1920, by reason of the War with Spain is 30,432.
Unexpended balances of appropriations.
Disbursements for pensions.
The amount disbursed in the payment of pensions for the year was $213,295,314, as against $222,159,292 for the preceding year.
The amount appropriated for the payment of pensions for the fiscal year 1920 was $215,000,000, as against $223,- 000,000 for the preceding year.
The number of pensioners residing in foreign countries in 1920 was 3,453, and the amount paid to these pensioners was $1,280,581.
Certificates issued and applications filed.
There were received and classified in the Law Division during the year 57,391 applications of all kinds.
Division of pension.
Under the act of March 3, 1899, providing for division of pension of resident pensioners of the United States who have deserted their wives or children, or who are inmates of soldiers' or sailors' homes, 321 cases were acted upon.
Under the act of August 8, 1882, of all claims of widows and children of pensioners undergoing imprisonment or insane without a guardian, 24 cases were acted upon.
New legislation.
An act to revise and equalize rates of pension to certain soldiers, sailors, and marines of the Civil War and the War with Mexico, to certain widows, including widows of the War of 1812, former widows, dependent parents and children of such soldiers, sailors, and marines, and to certain Army nurses, and granting pensions and increase of pensions in certain cases.
Immediately upon the approval of this act, a circular letter giving full information and clearly and succinctly stating the rates allowed was prepared in the bureau and sent out.
An act to pension soldiers and sailors of the War with Spain, Philippine insurrection, and the China relief expedition, was approved June 5, 1920, and the bureau promptly sent out a circular letter making plain the provisions of this act to those interested.
Under the acts of May 1, and June 5, a section of experts formed in the bureau handled 47,939 cases not requiring declarations, in less than five weeks.
Up to and including June 30, 1920, there were filed in the Bureau of Pensions 13,624 declarations under the act of May 1, and 9,002 declarations under the act of June 5.
An act for the retirement of employees of the classified civil service, and for other purposes, was approved May 22, 1920, and to carry into effect its provisions a division was promptly organized in the bureau.
Regulations and rules of procedure were drafted and approved by the Secretary of the Interior, the necessary blanks prepared, and circulars giving information were distributed.
On account of the similarity between the operations under this act and those under pension legislation and practice the bureau fears no difficulty in promptly carrying out the purpose of this entirely new legislation.
Witness on pension checks.
The Secretary's order of June 24, 1920, that thereafter no witnesses would be required to sign the indorsement on a pension check except where a pensioner signs by mark, made unnecessary over 4,000,000 signatures annually and relieved pensioners and those who cashed their checks of much trouble and annoyance.
Commendation for Special Examination Division.
Washington, April 24, 1920.
DEAR MR. SALTzGABER: The auditor reports, after having made a very careful audit and complete examination of my disbursement of the appropriation"Investigation of pension cases, Pension Office," fiscal year ended June 30, 1919, for the above period, no errors were found in any payment, and consequently no suspensions or disallowances were made against me.
This speaks well both for the accuracy and efficiency of your Special Examination Division and its well-arranged method of administrative examination of all vouchers of the field force, prior to certification of their correctness and approval by you and payment by me. I am making this statement to you as evidence of my satisfaction and approval of the work in this direction, so well performed by your Special Examination Division.
The division deserves the heartiest commendation in its efforts to protect the disbursing officer from any possible loss in the payment of an inaccurate account.
W. EVANS, Chief Disbursing Clerk.
The business of the office the last year was the heaviest in its history, exceeding substantially the record of any previous period, and straining the facilities of the bureau to the utmost.
72 per cent; and for total applications, 102,940, making an increase of 27,283, or 36 per cent.
The total number of patents granted and trade-marks, prints, and labels registered was 47,409.
This was 4,056 more than in the preceding year and 6,068 less than in 1916.
The receipts of money for the year were $2,615,697.33, being an increase of $502,347.16 over the preceding year, or 23.8 per cent, while the net deficit for the fiscal year 1919 of $65,228.13 was turned into a net surplus of $179,135.96, making a relative net increase for the year of $244,364.09.
During the year the bureau continued to carry out the policy of acting as a clearing house for educational information and the best opinions on educational matters, of giving advice, of promoting desirable educational ideas, and of conducting experiments.
Correspondence.
The Washington office received 166,746 letters, 45,828 library publications, and 58,287 forms of various kinds.
This does not include the field service.
Publications.
In spite of the increased cost of printing the bureau published 62 bulletins, 1 annual report, 1 annual statement, 18 leaflets, 10 circulars, 24 numbers of 40,000 copies each of School Life, 4 numbers of Americanization, and numerous reprints and miscellaneous documents.
It aided in issuing 70,000 copies weekly of the Geographic News Bulletin.
A directory of all the school officials in the United States was published.
Statistics.
The plan of cooperation in gathering statistics with State departments of education was carried to completion.
Seven statistical chapters of the biennial survey for 1917-18 were printed, five were prepared and sent to press, and two are in the process of completion.
Library.
One thousand two hundred and twenty-four volumes were added to the library by gift, exchange, and purchase; 390 volumes were transferred from the Library of Congress; serial numbers accessioned were 3,520; periodical numbers, 8,358; received from the bindery, 656 volumes.
One hundred and twelve bibliographies were revised and 84 new ones were compiled.
Libraries throughout the United States were assisted by giving a general knowledge of the printed matter issued by the United States Government and how it might be secured.
Aid to returned soldiers.
Information was given to a very large number of returned soldiers who wished to go to college of the different courses offered in the various colleges and schools of the United States, and the scholarships and fellowships that might be secured, and in general of the higher educational institutions of the United States.
Special activities.
In higher education a number of bulletins were prepared and published, or are now ready for the press.
These bulletins deal with such subjects as "Plans for the training of teachers,""University extension work,""Junior colleges,""Opportunities for graduate study," and statistical information about universities and State colleges.
In rural education studies have been made of plans of consolidation, certification of teachers, worth-while schools, high-school dormitories, standardization of rural schools, comparative salaries of school teachers, and of the teacher shortage throughout the United States.
In the field of city school systems much attention was given to problems of administration and supervision in village schools, especially those of small mining towns.
A number of circulars and pamphlets were published to further the spread of kindergarten education, to arouse public interest in it, and to provide plans for State kindergarten associations.
Home economics bulletins relating to the organization of home economics courses in secondary schools and to rural school lunches were prepared.
Information was gathered concerning the institutions offering home onomics work, State laws affecting home economics teaching, and the status of this branch of education in elementary an l secondary schools.
The cause of public health through the care of school children was promoted by a series of five special studies dealing with janitor service, school health supervision, one-story school buildings, ageweight-height standards, and physical education in colleges and universities.
A standardized course of study for commercial schools was prepared and sent to all private business schoools on the mailing list of the bureau.
Surveys of 250 cities for the purpose of determining their needs in men to carry on foreign trade were continued during the year A report on educational preparation for foreign service was completed.
The bureau made studies of the educational systems of foreign countries.
Among these were Scandinavia, Finland, Holland, Switzerland, Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, Japan, Latin America, France, and Germany.
The School·Board Service Division reestablished its files of teachers' names, and in the period from Décember 1, 1919, to July 1, 1920, received calls for 5,600 teachers and made approximately 5,000 nominations.
A clearing 'house for expert opinion.
In the matter of gathering expert opinion on special subjects of immediate importance the bureau held two conferences on highway engineering and highway transport and appointed a committee to develop an organization that would collect fundamental source material for use in preparing suitable textbooks in highway engineering and highway transport.
A conference was held for the purpose of discussing and formulating policies for the junior colleges.
Conferences were held at Minneapolis, Minn., and Cleveland, Ohio, to discuss methods by which Americanization work could be carried on successfully, and to review the results obtained in the cities where it had been going on for some time.
A conference was held at Cleveland to consider the welfare of the schools in the 12,000 villages of less than 2,500 population in the United States.
A conference of similar nature was held at Pittsburgh in November to aid in solving the problems of education in the small mining towns of the Appalachian Mountain regions.
Advisory.
As an advisory body the bureau continued its activities this year by making school surveys, giving help in school legislation and in school-plant construction, and aiding in other educational work in which its assistance was asked.
Five detailed and comprehensive surveys were made.
These were of the Hawaiian Islands, interesting and valuable because of the problems involved in educating widely differing racial groups; of Memphis, Tenn., a rapidly growing industrial city; of Winchester, Mass., a well-to-do city suburban to a big city; of the city of Brunswick and Glynn County, Ga.
These dealt with school building and financial needs of Lexington, Ky.
Advice in regard to school legislation.
State laws relating to textbooks, public-school revenues, and continuation-schools were studied and bulletins prepared.
The biennial summary and digest of school legislation were completed and submitted for publication.
State legislatures were assisted in determining what the legal status of any particular phase of education is and in enacting laws in the light of the best practice and experience.
School-plant construction.
Bulletins on schoolhouses were supplied.
Architects from all parts of the country were helped to make plans and corrections in school plants, and direct charge was taken in an advisory capacity of constructing a number of school plants.
Promotion.
For the purpose of promoting desirable tendencies in education, the bureau in May, 1920, held the first National Citizens' Conference on Education at Washington.
This meeting was followed by a special conference for the purpose of laying plans for conducting a national campaign for education.
As the first step in carrying out this campaign, a State conference was held at Greensboro, N. C.
Other conferences.
Nine of a series of 12 regional conferences were held to promote commercial education.
Two conferences were held on industrial education and two for the promotion of home economics.
Twelve of the series of rural conferences planned for the promotion of rural education throughout the United States were held in 10 different States.
Citizenship training.
The bureau caused to be published a series of lessons in civic training, with the end in view that the civic instruction of the child take its point of departure from his experience and refer back to it.
School-directed home gardening.
The working force of the United States School Garden Army was reduced because of decreased appropriation.
The mailing list of schools actively engaged in gardening was brought to a total of 45,000.
All single-sheet mimeographed lessons were revised and printed in manual form for the five climatic regions of the United States.
It is estimated that more than 2,000,000 children did school garden work, and produced more than $40,000,000 worth of food.
Visual instruction.
At the close of the war the bureau gathered large quantities of film prepared for war purposes and from other sources, that might be distributed to the schools during the year.
It established distributing centers for these films in nearly every State and put in circulation approximately 4,927,000 feet of film.
Home education.
Aid has been given to education in the home by means of 22 reading courses, 17 of which have been issued in leaflet form and distributed.
Sixteen of these were after-war courses, and 150,000 copies of them were sent into camps and cantonments.
Fifteen thousand persons reading for formal recognition have been enrolled in the various courses in the several States.
Community organization.
The bureau assisted in community-center development work in the 17 sections already organized in the District of Columbia and in cooperation with the Post Office Department in Mount Joy Township, Adams County, Pennsylvania.
The community-center program was presented to the country at large in 104 single lectures delivered at various meetings.
Special courses of six lectures on community work were given in 10 colleges.
Child health.
The health of children was promoted by encouraging the record of height and weight as an index to nutrition and general health.
A series of seven pamphlets were prepared and printed.
Approximately 500,000 pieces of material were sent on request.
The work was carried on through the agency of the Red Cross workers, home demonstration agents, public health nurses, and other organizations.
Research work.
For the purpose of conducting experiments in education a plan has been arranged to establish research stations at those universities and colleges maintained by public funds that are willing to cooperate with the bureau in making research studies with the bureau's aid and direction.
Sixteen such stations have been established, and they are now carrying on investigations in a large number of subjects very pertinent to the present-day educational activities.
Land-grant colleges.
The bureau prepared an annual report regarding the financial administration of the land-grant colleges, certified to the Secretary of the Interior that the money granted to these colleges by the Federal Government had been spent according to law, and made the necessary certification to Congress authorizing the continuance of the annual appropriation according to the Morrill-Nelson Acts.
Alaska.
The bureau administered the education, support, and medical relief of the natives of Alaska along thousands of miles of coast line and of great rivers, although problems of transportation made the work unusually difficult for the year.
Schools and community work were carried on in 67 villages.
Two hundred and fifty children left orphans by the epidemic of influenza were cared for in Eskimo families and in orphanages.
The colony at Metlakatla progressed so satisfactorily that it is hoped it may take over in 1921 the cannery of the Annette Island Packing Co.
If there has been the normal increase, there are now 180,000 reindeer in Alaska.
The Bureau of Biological Survey of the Department of Agriculture, in cooperation with the Bureau of Education, will make investigations, experiments, and demonstrations for the improvement of the reindeer industry.
At the request of the Secretary of the Interior, the Navy Department transferred to the bureau the U. S. S. Boxer, to be used in transporting employees and supplies to and from Alaska.
Under the direction of the superintendent of education, the entire work of taking the Alaska census of 1920 was done by the employees of the Alaska service.
Recommendations.
The Commissioner of Education has submitted a series of 29 recommendations for the betterment of the bureau, so that it may effectively deal with the very complex problems of an educational system to meet the needs of over 20,000,000 children residing in a territory so vast that conditions vary in all gradations, from those common to the extreme tropical zone to those prevailing in the extreme frigid zones.
He desires to restore several activities of the bureau for which Congress did not appropriate the necessary funds during the last year.
They are in connection with school-directed home gardening in cities and towns of over 2,500 inhabitants, one of the best and most valuable forms of employment for children between the ages of 8 and 15 years; the instruction of persons of foreign birth in the English language, and in the geography, history, industrial requirements, and manners and customs of our country, a work vitally important to the strength and welfare of the Nation; community organization, for the purpose of gathering the activities and interests of communities around the schoolhouse as a center; educational extension, to extend education for vocational efficiency, for citizenship, and general culture to many of the 4,000,000 recently discharged soldiers, to millions of laboring men and women and to the recently enfranchised women of the United States, to the millions of foreign-born men and women who wish to become acquainted with the ideals of America, and to the 2,500,000 boys and girls who every year attain their majority and enter the rank of active citizens; education of racial groups, for the purpose of solving the problem of the adaptation of the means of education to the Negroes of the United States and the education of the backward peoples in its Territories and possessions; and school-board service, through which the bureau can greatly help boards of education and boards of trustees of universities, colleges, normal schools, and technical schools in finding teachers of the grade and kind that are sought from the country at large rather than from local communities.
All of these activities have at one time been carried on by the bureau and the need for them has been amply shown.
In addition to the reestablishment of those things already mentioned, the commissioner recommends that the bureau receive appropriations for and take up the investigation of the education of the exceptional children, such as the deaf, the blind, the incorrigible, the diseased, and those whose superiority, general or specific, makes it desirable that they be given special opportunities in special subjects or for general promotion; the investigation of adult illiteracy and the dissemination of information as to the best methods of teaching illiterate men and women to read and write; cooperation with sçhools, universities, colleges, and normal schools in making important and definite experiments under scientific control in elementary and secondary school education; and cooperation with State and county officers in establishing and maintaining model rural schools for the purpose of adding to the effectiveness of rural schools throughout the United States.
For the established work of the bureau in the fields of higher education, rural schools, commercial education, child health, city school administration, visual instruction, cooperation between school and home, industrial training, foreign educational systems, statistics, and medical relief in Alaska, the commissioner desires increased appropriations, additional members to the staff of expert workers and clerical force, larger traveling and printing funds, higher statutory salaries, and the removal of the limitation placed upon salaries paid from lump-sum appropriations.
He renews his recommendation for the erection of a building adequate to house the educational activities of the National Government, and suggests that such a building might properly be erected in memorial of the patriotic services rendered by the schools, their teachers, and pupils during the Great War, and that these teachers and children might well be permitted to contribute to the cost of the building.
Nature of the work of the year.
Only the briefest review of the varied activities of the Geological Survey's scientific service is necessary to show that every one of its activities is forward looking—that facts are being collected with which to guide present action and to plan for future action.
This is true not only of a special investigation like the superpower survey just authorized, but of the collection of stream-gauging records, the making of topographic maps, the study and the estimation of mineral resources and mineral production, and even the interpretation of geologic history.
The Geological Survey's function in the classification of the public lands is not simply cooperation with the General Land Office in the administration of the land laws—it is a cooperative effort to insure the best use of these lands, to plan their use so that the West may not have to pay the penalties attaching to an unwise disposition of the Nation's real estate.