Washington, D. C., November 15, 1921.
Sir: I herewith submit for your consideration my first annual report, together with the reports of the various offices, etc., of the operations of the Department of the Interior.
This report covers a portion of the time under the administration of my immediate predecessor and the reports generally, of course, only cover that portion of my administration from March 4 to June 30, 1921.
I am, however, referring in some instanées to the operations of the department since the latter date.
In view of the fact that the country is now in process of reorganization after the Great War, and of the peculiar interest of this department because of its functions in such reorganization, I feel justified in referring to the history of the original organization or creation of this department.
Just after the Mexican War in 1849, the Congress of the United States took under consideration the report of Hon.
R. J. Walker, Secretary of the Treasury, and other reports, being impressed with the necessity and desirability of the organization of another new and distinct department of this Government.
On February 12, 1849, the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives submitted a report in which, among other things, they referred to the mischievous losses and dangers resulting from the then existing irrational and ruinous distributions of the executive bureaus and duties.
They stated, however, that there were broader considerations of public policy dictating the creation of a new department.
They recited the fact that since the establishment of the Federal Government 60 years before some $700,000,000 had been expended for purposes of military aggression or defense, and that the average annual expenditure for the War and Navy Departments was then $12,000,000 to $14,000,000.
They stated the fact to be that during the same period for the promotion of the arts of peace, the development of agriculture, and of the mechanical sciences, and for the facilitation of internal intercourse and trade, the support of education, etc., the total expenditure had not exceeded $1,000,000.
The general faet remains unaffected that war and preparations for war have been praetically regarded as the chief duty and end of this Government, while the arts of peace and production, whereby nations are subsisted, civilization advanced, and happiness secured, have been esteemed unworthy the attention, or foreign to the objeets, of this Government.
It seems to us that this should not always continue, but that we should, as a wise people, reorganize the Government so far as to fulfill these duties also, which are suggested by the nature, aspirations, and wants of our race as physical, moral, and intellectual beings; that it should do something toward protecting the people against those internal enemies, ignorance, destitution, and vice, as well as against those foreign foes who may invade or who it is apprehended may assail us.
The result of the recommendation of the committee was the enactment of a law approved March 3, 1849, entitled “An act to establish the home department," etc. The act provided that from its passage there shall be created a new executive department to be called the "Department of the Interior," etc.
This act conferred powers of supervision and appeal upon the new Secretary over the acts of the following officers: Commissioner of the General Land Office, Commissioner of Patents, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Commissioner of Pensions; also over the officers of the Census; accounts of marshals, elerks, etc.
The first report of the first Secretary, Hon.
Thomas Ewing, of Ohio, recommended organization of a separate bureau of agriculture, as agricultural matters had theretofore been in the hands of the Patent Office.
March 3, 1855, the Government Hospital for the Insane was organized and placed under the Secretary of the Interior.
February 16, 1857, an Institute for the Deaf, Dumb, and Blind was incorporated, and the Secretary of the Interior was directed to pay the expenses of the pupils from the District of Columbia.
The name of this institution was later changed to the"Columbia Institution for the Deaf" by the sundry civil act of March 4, 1911.
February 17, 1857, the Secretary was authorized to contract for the construction of wagon roads from Fort Kearney, Nebr., to the eastern boundary of California, as well as other roads in Western States and Territories.
It is unnecessary to refer to the various acts conferring jurisdiction upon the Secretary of the Interior in various governmental matters.
In 1867 the Department of Education was established and in 1868 was placed under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior.
The first national park—the Yellowstone—was created in March, 1872, and placed under the exclusive control of the Secretary of the Interior.
Acts creating other parks were passed from time to time, and each was placed under the charge of the Secretary of the Interior, including the Hot Springs Reservation, in Arkansas.
By the act of March 1, 1873, general jurisdiction over the existing Territories was placed under the Secretary in the Interior Department, and from that date the Secretary has had general supervision over the Territories as well as supervision of affairs pertaining to Alaska.
In 1879 provision was made for the appointment of a Director of the Geological Survey, whose duties were prescribed, to be discharged under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior.
The Bureau of Labor was established in the Department of the Interior by the act of June, 1884.
Originally the Secretary of the Interior had supervision over the accounts as well as the reports of the Interstate Commerce Commission.
By the act of March 3, 1891, the President was authorized to set apart and reserve any part of the public lands wholly or in part, covered with timber or undergrowth, as reservations, ete.
The administration of the forest reserves was by order of the Secretary placed under the Commissioner of Public Lands.
By the act of June 17, 1902, what is now known as the Reclamation Service was established and placed directly under the Secretary of the Interior.
In the exercise of his diseretion, the Secretary first placed the work under the Director of the Geological Survey, but later placed the work under an officer designated as director.
On May 16, 1910, the Bureau of Mines was established in the Department of the Interior.
The justification for the foregoing sketch may be found in the fact that history is now repeating itself, and that after a period of unlimited expenditure in war measures and in preparing for war, in the creation of a Navy, ete.
Do not include reclamation withdrawals, no figures for which are available.
Other withdrawals, such as coal (43,231,762 acres), oil (6,518,s65 acres), phosphate (2,724,394 acres), ete.
Of the 154,000,000 acres (approximately) reserved and known as forest reserves, a large acreage is of course used for grazing and it fitted for grazing homesteads, while other large areas are susceptible of cultivation and may hereafter furnish homes for some of our population.
The Department of the Interior has jurisdiction over these forest lands when thrown open and has jurisdiction also over mines and mineral claims and agricultural éntries upon such reserves.
Of the remaining unreserved 200,000,000 acres, a very large portion is only fitted for grazing of live stock, so that it can be readily seen that we can no longer pursue the policy of rewarding our returned soldiers by providing them with free homesteads under bonus or additional homestead laws or by any other legislation such as has followed war, from that of the Revolution to the Spanish War.
Provision may be made for large numbers of these soldiers, as well as other citizens, by which they may secure homesteads under the various reclamation projects now either in course of construction or proposed to be hereafter constructed.
The area necessary for homes under reclamation projects is much less than that in the rainfall area where homes heretofore have been obtainable.
I have had prepared from data in this department a table in which is set forth, in addition to minimum valuations of land areas, ete.
It will be noted that the total valuation of the "national estate," as given in the recapitulation table is something more than $12,000,000,000.
Of course, it will be understood, first, that this is merely an estimate, and, second, that it is the estimate of the amount to be received by the United States by way of royalty, rental, ete.
The total valuation of the properties upon the basis of the royalties given, which is placed at the minimum would, of course, be from one hundred to two hundred times as much as the royalty itself.
In other words, based upon this estimate, the actual value of these products would be a minimum of $150,000,000,000 added to the wealth of the United States when the same are realized upon.
The resources of the great Territory of Alaska and the wealth to be drawn therefrom in the future are almost incalculable.
There are 21,000,000 acres of lands in forests in that Territory and many millions of acres upon the public domain upon which settlers may depend for mining timbers, lumber for houses, etc.
There are millions of acres of land fitted for agriculture and the agricultural resources are such that a large population can be supported in Alaska without the importation of foodstuffs from the United States or other countries.
Alaska's resources have not been developed for various reasons, among others, the lack of transportation, and largely because óf the fact that these resources are administered through some 38 bureaus and various departments of this Government.
In my opinion authority to administer the laws relative to Alaska's natural resources must be vested in some one department of this Government that the activities charged with the administration of such laws may be properly coordinated.
Transportation is necessary, of course, and the Government must assist in the matter of transportation.
The Government has assisted in so far as the construction of a railroad from Seward to Fairbanks is concerned, which road, I am gratified to report, will be ready for operation in a few months.
Vast deposits of valuable metalliferous minerals and great coal mines are known to exist and must be made accessible to the railroad and to coast transportation.
This, of course, necessitates the construetion of wagon roads, trails, etc., and the development of water transportation from coast points to seagoing transportation lines.
While no extensive oil development has as yet been made, it is well known to this department that indications of valuable oil deposits exist from Point Barrow to the Seward Peninsula.
One of the great national assets of this country which is being administered through a specific trust is the property of the Indians, the value of which is seldom realized.
No estimate is attempted to be made in the foregoing table of the value of minerals upon the Indian reservations other than the estimated value of oil, yet it is well known that hundreds of millions of tons of coal are exposed upon the Navajo Reserve alone, while it is equally well known that various other reserves have large and workable veins of coal and valuable deposits of metalliferous and other minerals.
The Indians, as a general rule, are not qualified to make the most of their natural resources, and the same must be held for them and developed by their trustee, yet the value of this property means so much added to the total wealth developed and undeveloped of the United States.
The development of the agricultural resources of these reservations inures to the benefit not only of the Indian who will himself cultivate the lands, but to the white man who will develop the same as lessee while the Indian receives the proceeds of the lease.
I have recently returned from an investigating tour through various reclamation projects in the Northwestern States, including northern California, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, Montana, Wyoming, Idaho, and Nebraska.
I found the majority of these projects being well managed, and the farmers located thereupon generally satisfied with such management.
Of course, the farmers upon the reclamation projects have been suffering from the general stagnation as have those engaged in agriculture all over the United States.
The project managers, engineers, and others in active charge for the Government of its various projects are generally not only competent but thoroughly interested and enthusiastic in the discharge of their duties.
There has been built up in the field an excellent organization of splendid competent men, very many of whom remain in the Government employ engaged in the development of these projects because of love for the service and the work, although they could receive double or treble the pay from private individuals for similar work.
I found the construction work being performed in the most economical way.
Of course very many mistakes have been made in the past and at times much dissatisfaction has been expressed.
Those connected with the department and engaged in securing settlers for the lands have in many instances been overly enthusiastic and painted the beauties and advantages of some of our projects in gorgeous colors.
Stern reality has in many instances disenchanted the settler, who has learned that homemaking means hard work and in many instances hardship, although carried out with the assistance of the United States Government.
Upon the whole, practically every project is successful and the larger portion of the amount heretofore expended and to be expended in its completion may safely be counted upon to be returned under the provisions of the law.
Under the policy which has been followed, where the water users have agreed to repay the project costs and the operation and maintenance until all construction charges have been repaid, the original estimates have necessarily been very largely increased in many instances and the water users have found themselves under obligations to repay larger amounts per aere than had been contemplated, and in some instances understood, by them.
This has been brought about at times by the insistence of the users themselves that addition should be made or additional work done which was not originally contemplated.
It is only a few years since this bureau was created and it became necessary to organize a force for carrying on this great work, and such work was of a primary and necessarily in some instances of an experimental nature.
It was felt that it was impossible to fix a definite price under a given project at which a water right could be sold to the user, either in justice to himself or to the Government, and hence it was impossible to adopt a plan by which, based upon a definite per acre contract price, interest could be charged upon deferred payments.
I have in more than one instance càlled the attention of water users to the fact that had interest at Government rates been charged them upon 20-year deferred payments at the price which such water user understood originally that he was to pay, the principal and such interest would have amounted to more than the per acre charge which the water user now thought was probably too great.
It is to be hoped that, profiting by past experience, it may be possible in future operations to make a definite contract for the sale of a water right at a fixed price with interest upon the deferred payments, and when this policy can be adopted much of the complaint which has been heard in the past, but which is dying out, will be entirely done away with.
I shall reserve for a future occasion a more extended report based upon the actual figures showing the total amounts authorized and received, expended and to be expended, the amounts returned and to be retuřned, and in fact a general finaneial showing as to the conditions in this service.
The organization having been built up for the construction of various large and costly projects, it becomes true of course that when such construction program is restricted, the organization itself must be cut down or the overhead charges will become excessive.
Since my return from this investigation, I have been engaged in considering plans for the material reduction of overhead charges and expenses and in such plans am receiving the cordial support of the director.
A committee has just reported upon this subject after about two months investigation, but I have not had the time to go thoroughly into their recommendations.
The water users of the different projects however may be assured that the bureau and the department here are doing everything possible to reduce expenditures and that reductions in operation and maintenance charges upon many of the projects may be expected at a very early date.
In addition to complaints with reference to charges, etc., criticism from various sources has been directed from time to time to the general policy of the Government in appropriating money for the reclamation of arid lands and the development of the agricultural interests of the arid country.
Even recently I have heard it remarked that, in the development of the old States, particularly of the great corn growing States and the agricultural States of the Middle West and Northwest, the pioneers who made homes in such States had not received the assistance from the Government which was being demanded by and accorded to the people of the arid West.
Of course these statements are made without thought, as reference to our recent history will at once disclose.
The moneys appropriated by Congress for the reclamation projects are derived almost entirely from the sale of public lands in the public land States, from receipts from oil upon the publie lands in the public land States, and similar sources of revenue, and the cost of the projects under the law is to be and is being repaid by the purchasers of water rights and lands under the projeets themselves, thus constituting reimbursable funds to be, used again as they are received in the Treasury.
No outright appropriation has so far been made to the States of the West or water users in such States, as even in the case of the $1,000,000 appropriated for the Elephant Butte projeet in New Mexico (this amount not to be repaid by the water users), this amount was appropriated for the purpose of, in part, carrying out a treaty obligation of this Government with the Government of Mexico, and to-day the fact is that in carrying out the provisions of this treaty, the water users under the Elephant Butte project are paying the operation and maintenance charges themselves, without the cost of one cent to the Government of the United States for the water delivered to Mexico, under the provisions of the treaty referred to.
Reference to the history of the public lands will show that in 1836, by an act of Congress (5 Stat., 55), and the act of October 2, 1837, there was taken from the moneys in the Treasury of the United States the amount of $28,101,644.91, which sum was deposited to various States under the terms of the act referred to, the respective sums to“ remain on deposit with the States until otherwise directed by Congress.
Approximately $25,000,000 of the total of $28,000,000 so deposited was money in the Treasury from the proceeds of publie-land sales, and needless to say, not one cent of this money has ever been returned.
A very simple calculation at 5 per cent interest will disclose that thus the States mentioned received outright from the public-land funds of the United States as much money as has éver been expended in the reclamation of arid lands in the West, which latter sums, however, are under the law to be repaid in full by the individuals developing homes and cultivating the lands under the irrigation projects.
The great State of Ohio was largely settled through bonus lands, military land grants in recognition of military or other service, etc., and in addition thereto received from the proceeds of public-land sales more than $2,000,000 in 1836.
Prior to 1862 the lands were disposed of by cash sale, and later by preemption entry.
The States of the Northwest were largely settled by colonists or individuals going upon the lands and later having their titles recognized and their patents issued upon the payment of small amounts with credits for military service, etc.
As a matter of fact, the policy of this Government has been not only to pension and take care of its soldiers from the period of the Indian wars down to the present time, but to grant bonuses, either in cash or as heretofore generally in valuable land grants in recognition of the military services rendered by its citizens.
The administration of the General Land Office has for many reasons not been as satisfactory to the settlers for' several years as it should have been, due to a variety of causes.
I am not prepared to go specifically into details at this time for the reason that changes are being worked out which as yet have afforded but little time for observation of the results.
It is my firm impression, however, that entirely too much red tape has been used and too many technicalities imposed in the matter of granting final patents to actual bona fide homestead entrymen.
Shortly speaking, I discovered recently that there are now pending approximately 19,000 cases before the General Land Office in which patents had not issued, although final proof had been made and final certificates issued by the local office.
Many of these cases I find pending in the office in Washington, and approximately 14,000 pending in various divisions and in the field.
Although final certificates have issued, patents have been held up because upon examination in the Washington office some supposed or actual defect in the final proof was discovered, which defect it has been assumed required additional evidence from the field or to be supplied by other methods before patent should issue.
Among such defects are those in regard to proof of citizenship, proof of cultivation, of residence, the establishing of the correct names of the claimants, etc.
Upon giving this matter personal attention it has been discovered that very many cases have been held up or sent back to the local offices because of supposed irregularities or defects not chargeable against the elaimant for the land but due entirely to negligence, mistakes, or possible incompetency of some of the local officers or clerks assigned to duty in their offices.
I find that a questionnaire had been prepared for use of the division chiefs here and their assistants containing approximately 50 questions or points to which the attention of the investigator was directed and for correction before passing the case to final patent.
Nearly one-half of these questions or points made were concerning the examination of publications of final proof notices and comparison of same with the correct descriptions of the land; the question as to the proper affidavit of publication, as to the proper proof of publication, etc.
These were all matters which should have received the careful attention of the local officers before final certificate was issued.
The true purpose of the law requiring publication of notice of final proof, of course, is to put other parties upon notice so that other entrymen or owners might present, themselves before the local office in protest against the issuance of final certificate.
Bearing this in mind, and bearing equally in mind the fact that the homestead entryman is not responsible for error in publication of such notice, his patent should not be withheld from one to four or five years while some one else's error is being corrected.
Under the policy now being pursued it gratifies me to say that within the last two weeks more cases have been passed for patent than in any month or two months prior to this time.
Our purpose is, of course, to guard against fraud in the disposition of the public lands; but where there is no fraud or serious error, to pass to patent immediately just and bona fide honest entries upon which final proof has been made.
The Geological Survey classifies public lands and reports upon such classification, and in this respect particularly cooperates more closely with the General Land Office.
I am gratified to note that the work of the Survey in this line has been speeded up; and in fact I may be allowed to note here my pleasure in the realization that the different bureaus of this department are cooperating with each other where such cooperation is necessary in the discharge of the public business as possibly they have not cooperated prior to this time.
Additional work has been placed upon the Bureau of Mines recently, due to the growing magnitude of the oil business; and an additional force is now being organized that the Bureau of Mines may take more complete charge of the oil production, prices, collection of royalties, etc., upon the public lands and upon the naval reserves than has heretofore been the case.
The scientific and expert assistance of the officers of this bureau is becoming of more material benefit from day to day.
The Geological Survey and the Bureau of Mines are also now giving attention to oil and mineral resources of the Indian reservations and the handling of oil and mineral production.
This cooperation has not been in effect prior to a recent date.
Of course the General Land Office through its expert employees and officials and the Indian Bureau through its force are engaged in the execution of lease contracts, etc., for oil and minerals upon the public lands and Indian reservations; but they will receive very great assistance from the active cooperation of the Bureau of Mines and the Geological Survey in all field work.
Possible losses through lack of field cooperation heretofore in the matter of oil royalties and prices, if such losses have been incurred, will be entirely obviated in the future through the active cooperation at present being effected.
Allotments to individual Indians entitled to the same are being made as rapidly as posible.
Where the Indian is shown to be competent and capable in the management of his own affairs fee patents are issued removing restrictions as to alienation.
The Indian is no more capable of handling his own affairs than is the average white man: and when restrietions upon alienation are removed, in very many cases he soon finds himself without property or resources.
Having established his competeney, however, under restrictions, it is presumed that he has at least learned enough to be able to care for himself and accumulate property again, although he may have disposed of that which has been deeded him in fee simple by the Government.
The salaries paid to officers in the field are entirely insufficient.
Agents or superintendents are receiving compensation in an entirely insufficient amount to justify competent business men in holding such positions.
The poliey pursued in the last few years has been to place in charge of an Indian reservation as agent or superintendent those who prior to such appointment were day-school teachers, departmental clerks, or others with no more business experience.
The majority of these agents are conscientious, sincere, and industrious; but the policy of placing them in charge of these great business interests can only be justified because of the necessity growing out of the small remuneration which can be paid to an agent or superintendent.
Aside from the latter difficulty, however, which is almost insurmountable, the bureau and the department are restricted by the civil-service rules in the choice of agents or superintendents.
The reclamation projects upon the Indian reservations which I have examined have been constructed and are being operated in an economical manner, but in so far as the Indian himself is'directly concerned I can not say that the reclamation projects have proven a glowing success.
The Indians upon the reservations are not, as a general thing, tillers of the soil.
I have never seen the fact commented upon, but it is worthy of note, that in visiting the Indian tepee or the Indian residence it is only in the most exceptional case that one will see a chicken or a pig about the premises.
The Indians visit one another for days at a time and hence will not burden themselves with the care of fowls or pigs which need constant attention.
This is mentioned simply as indicative of the fact that as yet the average Indian is not fitted to lead a sedentary agricultural life.
The lands under these irrigation projects will be found, where eultivated, largely in the hands of white tenants; and even where long-time leases have expired and the property has been returned to the allottee or owner it will generally be found to have become of much less productive value unless immediately leased to some other white man.
In my judgment, where allotments are made to individual Indians whose restrictions may be thereafter removed under the law, great care should be exercised to retain on the reservation at least a sufficient acreage of cultivable land, preferably, of course, under a reclamation project, with which to provide each Indian of the tribe a home when he shall have disposed of the property given him in fee simple.
Under irrigation such home tract, retained merely for the use and not for the purpose of deeding title, may consist of a small acreage, possibly not more than five acres.
It has recently been found necessary to provide homes for the Hawaiians who were not able to compete in the struggle for existence with those who have come into their territory, and hence who have by their own acts possibly found themselves without a roof to shelter them.
The Pueblos and some other Indians of the Southwest have always been tillers of the soil and are content to remain agriculturists, but this is not the case with the majority of the reservation Indians.
The Navajos, who have a very large reservation in the States of Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, and Arizona, are stock raisers and are increasing in numbers.
Their reservation contains great mineral wealth which may be utilized for their benefit later, but generally consists of grazing lands fitted for their needs in so far as its area will permit.
The beneficial use of this reservation has been very greatly extended through the sinking of numerous wells by agents of the bureau, extending the grazing possibilities very materially.
These stock raisers have suffered from extended drouth, low prices of cattle, sheep, and wool, as have their white neighbors in the Southwest.
The bureau is now seriously engaged in the consideration of the acquisition of an additional area for the Navajos when the same may be necessary and with due respeet to the rights of other peoples in the country adjacent.
I have recently visited many of the national parks and have given time and consideration to the management of the same, both in the field and in the Washington office.
From time to time complaints come in with reference to the policy adopted in handling transportation, hotel, and other privileges in the parks.
These parks are, of course, national property and are maintained and operated through national funds under the authority of Congress itself.
Being situated, however, in the States, the people of the State, while appreciating the great benefits from such location within their boundaries, and while realizing that the visitors from other States bring in large sums of money which are expended in their midst, yet are desirous of conducting enterprises within the parks and are prone to complain to their Congressmen and others where the national policy adopted and enforced apparently excludes them, or the majority of them, from indiscriminate enjoyment of the opportunities to make money.
No criticism is intended in calling attention to this fact, but of course it is apparent to anyone that these parks, being national projects supported and maintained by the National Government as national playgrounds, must be operated and maintained by some authority having control over transportation and transportation charges, publie camps, hotel privileges, and other activities within the parks.
The season is short in each of the parks and great crowds surge into them during practically three months of the twelve.
After considering all protests and giving most serious attention to the different problems I can not refrain from expressing my gratification at the excellent, businesslike, tactful, and competent management of the majority of the parks under the jurisdiction of the different superintendents and the general authority of the Director of the National Parks.
It has given me pleasure to be able to assist in reconciling some of the differences which have existed.
There have been many projects contemplating use of water for power and other purposes within the park limits.
A few months since I announced the policy of the department under its present head with reference to this matter, and may shortly restate it here, to wit: That no proposition for the use of waters by impounding or otherwise within the limits of the park itself would receive consideration—at least of a favorable nature—from myself unless such proposed project was to be constructed, maintained, and operated by the Government of the United States.
It may be possible that in some instances under such governmental control waters could be used without detriment to the park or injury to the purposes for which it was established.
Each such proposition, where it is coupled with the provision of governmental construction, maintenance and control, will receive proper consideration upon its own merits; the general policy being not to approve any project which will interfere with the purposes for which the parks were set aside.
Legislation is necessary to enable the Patent Office to perform duties incumbent upon it under the law.
The matter of pensions to the old soldiers has been receiving much consideration.
It was discovered that there were 99,100 cases pending and that very little progress was being made beyond the allowance of current claims.
It early became apparent that unless additional force was granted and the present work speeded up many thousand pensioners must die before their pending claims could be reached in the ordinary course.
Representations were made to the Director of the Budget and estimates submitted for an additional office force, that these pending claims might be adjusted and the business brought up current within twelve months.
I am informed that the Director of the Budget has approved such estimate.
I desire, however, to call your attention to the comparative business done in this bureau in the disposition of pension cases in 1920 and 1921.
From March 4, 1920, to June 30, 1920, there were disposed of 21,743 cases, and from July 1, 1920, to October 30, 1920, 20,929, or a total from March 4, 1920, to October 30, 1920, of 42,672 cases.
From March 4, 1921, to June 30, 1921, there have been disposed of 37,063 cases.
From July 1 to October 30, 1921, 42,703 cases were disposed of, or a total of 79,766 cases.
It will thus be seen that the amount of business done in the way of disposition of pension cases since March 4, 1921, has been almost double that during the same period of 1920.
The legal force of the department have been very efficient in the discharge of their many and onerous duties, and at present we are engaged in coordinating their efforts to the better advantage of the different bureaus with which they have to deal.
In the disposition of the business of the solicitor's office, legal department, from March 4, 1920, to November 1, 1920, there were disposed of 6,040 cases.
During the same period, that is to say, from March 4, 1921, to November 1, 1921, there have been disposed of 10,146 cases.
There are now under consideration different bills in the Congress of the United States providing for further activities in the matter of reclamation of public lands.
Should such proposed bills be enacted into law additional opportunity for labor will be offered to the unemployed and at the same time homes made for those who desire them.
1) The protection of the Imperial Valley and other irrigation projects from the present constant danger through overflow of the uncontrolled storm waters of that great river.
2) The production of hydroelectrie power through the Boulder Canyon project in the enormous amount of approximately 700,000 horsepower.
A hearing has been set, to be held in California at an early date, for the consideration of these subjeets.
However the result may be brought about, whether through the activities of private capital under governmental control and regulation or through direet governmental appropriation, such result should be speeded as rapidly as possible, partieularly in view of the constant danger referred to from the flood waters of the Colorado.
At the same time such speeding up will afford employment for those desiring and needing it, and the returns will be so enormous upon any imaginable necessary investment that the working out of such result should be aided in every possible way by the Government through its officials.
Referring to the proposed completion of irrigation projects now under partial construction and to the construction of other irrigation projects, I most seriously urge that an affirmative strong policy should be announced by the Executive.
The necessary advanees can be made from year to year without becoming an excessive burden upon the taxpayers, and as has already been proven by experience, one year's crop upon one acre of reclaimed irrigated ground will be of a value largely in excess of the total amount expended in rendering such acre productive.
Under the present system or any proposed legislation, of course the cost of such project will be repaid and meanwhile the annual added wealth yielded will lighten the tax burdens upon all of the taxpayers of the country.
I have referred to the past policy under which no interest has been charged upon deferred payments.
I have also stated that in the future it would be the policy to sell a water right for a fixed sum.
This poliey should be engrafted in any legislation enacted, and of course accompanied by provision for the payment of reasonable interest upon deferred payments.
This department is thoroughly organized with sufficient force, with the exception of ordinary laborers, and is ready to carry on any work which such an enlightened policy as suggested might be assigned to it in reclamation or other development of our natural resources.
I have referred to the power development which would go hand .
It is of course realized by every thinking person that through the development of hydroelectric power the conservation of the coal, oil.
In a special report I recently called your attention to the wonders which can be worked in the northeastern portion of this country by the development of the water-power resources in such States.
The development of hydroelectric power through private initiative is going on in the West.
It may be perfectly feasible to develop such power by private initiative on the Colorado; if so, then such initiative should be encouraged by the Government and the power developed should be under the final control of the Government to the extent that those States to which it can be conducted may receive their proportionate benefit as the demand in such State increases, irrespective of the present immediate demand in those States, which at this day can take a greater amount of such power.
Whether this result can be attained by any other than Government construction is a serious question in my mind.
That it must be attained by such governmental construction, or in any event by the United States Government control, to me appears to be self-evident.
Should it be the policy to authorize such construction by governmental instrumentality, this department is able and of course ready to do the work.
1. Entered and allowed during the fiscal year public and Indian lands, 15,631,630 acres, a decrease of 805,860 acres as compared with the year previous.
3. Collected from all sources during the year, $14,508,197.36, of which sum, after the deposit in the Treasury of the United States of receipts for the benefit of special funds, there was turned over to the United States Treasury for the credit of its general fund the sum of $1,794,905.16.
4. Collected and deposited in the United States Treasury as the result of work of the Field Service, $106,050.71.
5. Restored to the public domain as the result of investigations in the field, 117,565 acres.
6. Investigated in the field and reported upon, 21,134 cases.
7. Conducted 219 hearings in Government contests.
8. Obtained 31 convictions in criminal cases prosecuted during the year.
9. Approved and accepted surveys and resurveys covering an area of 7,179,412 acres.
10. Entered of record,-388,456 tract-book notations.
11. Approved for patent, 24,579 final homestead entries.
12. Issued 4,299 patents covering an acreage of 1,249,592 acres under the stock-raising homestead law.
13. Secured the withdrawal of 230,164 acres for stock driveway purposes and released 112,821 acres from such withdrawal; gross area included in driveway withdrawals at the close of the fiscal year, 9,015,601 acres.
14. Approved for patent 6 townsite entries and 1,939 town lot entries, involving 2,300 lots.
15. Allowed 489 entries under the Minnesota drainage act for 75,000 acres; patented a total of 1,002,240 acres under this act since its passage.
16. Obtained 11 judicial deerees canceling former grants of rights of way.
18. Considered and disposed of reports on 89 irrigation companies and districts, favorably in 45 cases, affecting approximately 300 desert-land entries.
19. Received 116 power-site applications, involving 552,699 acres, under the Federal water-power act.
20. Patented 76,381 acres under the Carey Act.
21. Patented 1,599 desert-land entries.
22. Approved for patent 428 final reclamation homestead entries.
23. Effected the withdrawal for reclamation purposes under the act of June 17, 1902, of 2,165,585 acres; restored in the same period, 576,612 acres.
24. Received 477 applications for the development of underground waters in Nevada under the act of October 22, 1919, covering approximately 1,000,000 acres of land; favorable action taken on 297 applications.
25. Effected the withdrawal of 3,071,401 acres of public lands for various purposes and restored to the public domain 935,539 acres.
26. Restored under the act of June 5, 1920, reserved shore spaces on Alaskan waters in 14 cases.
27. Restored and opened to entry, subject to the preference right of ex-service men in the war with Germany 2,910,392 acres.
28. Certified to the States as indemnity school lands, 738,354 acres, and 175,176 acres under grants to the States for other purposes.
29. Conveyed to the States 18,825 acres, with reservations to the United States of mineral deposits.
30. Conveyed to the States 9,498 acres under cooperative agreements; total amount of land so far conveyed under such agreements, 248,428 acres.
32. Certified and patented railroad and wagon road selections covering an area of 713,210 acres.
33. Secured 11 additional relinquishments from the Northern Pacific Co., under the act of February 28, 1919, for the relief of settlers, covering an area of 3,040 acres; a total of 16,940 acres relinquished under said act.
34. Patented during the year 11,940 acres to The Dalles military road in partial adjustment of its grant.
35. Sold the timber on 560 acres of Coos Bay Wagon Road lands, for which the sum of $50,037.38 was received; total amount of sales to date, $80,811.30.
36. Ascertained and paid the taxes accrued and unpaid on revested Oregon and California lands to the amount of $40,967.64; total amount of taxes paid on these revested lands, $1,571,044.05.
37. Sold the timber on 8,715 acres of Oregon and California revested lands, for which the sum of $358,065.19 was received; total sales to date involve 19,253 acres, for which the sum of $738,977.46 has been received.
38. Restored for the benefit of 12 preference right claimants, 1,088 acres of revested Oregon and California lands.
39. Sold the surplus lands in the abandoned military reservations of Fort McKinney, Wyo., and Camp Bowie, Ariz., for which $23,007.17 was received.
40. Received $46,027.56 on account of Chippewa logging under the aet of June 27, 1902.
Total amount received under said act to, date, $9,239,202.94.
41. Issued patents in trust to Indians in 4,198 cases, covering an acreage of 220,570 acres, and 2,269 patents in fee for an area of 487,612 acres.
42. Sold at public sale 75,094 acres of Indian lands, for which there were received $181,211.06.
43. Surveyed and awarded to the respective settler elaimants under the act of May 29, 1920, 3,383 acres, erroneously omitted from survey on the Snake River, Idaho.
44. Approved for patent selections aggregating 23,117 acres of lieu selections for lands in Indian reservations, under the act of April 21, 1904.
45. Approved for patent 273 seleetion in lieu of lands embraced within national forests, under the act of June 4, 1897.
46. Decided 119 contests involving mining elaims.
47. Allowed 111 prospecting permits for potash.
48. Awarded under the mineral leasing act 55 applieations for coalprospecting permits, 4 leases, and 4 licenses, covering in all 87,781 acres of coal land.
49. Awarded 3 leases for coal mining in Alaska, covering 4,520 acres.
51. Awarded 13 oil and gas leases under section 14 of the mineralleasing act.
52. Received $6,346.70 as the total amount of back royalty paid for past production on leases issued under section 14 of the mineralleasing act.
53. Received $1,040,610.50, total bonus paid for oil and gas leases sold under section 17 of the mineral-leasing act.
54. Awarded 160 oil and gas leases, covering 17,727 acres; 105 prospecting permits, covering 79,781 acres, under the relief provisions of the mineral-leasing act.
55. Collected $8,334,589.76, back royalty under the relief provi sions of the mineral-leasing act.
56. Decided during the past year 909 litigated cases, not including mineral contests, and disposed of by default or by abatement 2,553 contests.
57. Issued during the year 52,785 patents, embracing 10,117,809 acres.
1. Inaugurated a plan for strengthening Indian education by revising the course of study and placing all schools under the frequent inspection of experienced supervisors who, under the direction of a chief supervisor, will work for higher standards and uniform practice, and for the fullest cooperation with the State public schools.
Permanent teaching service is being secured.
Day schools will be improved.
The study of English will be emphasized.
Localities with inadequate school facilities will be better served, and measures enforced for more regular attendance of pupils.
2. Took prompt action that effectively checked the spreading of typhus fever in the San Juan Reservation, N. Mex., and otherwise maintained normal health conditions in the Indian country, with a resulting net gain in population.
The Indian health service is more than the dispensing of medicine to the sick; it is essentially preventive and educational.
3. Increased the area of crop-producing lands on the reservations by 130,000 acres over the preceding year.
Gave special protection to Indian live stock in districts affected by severe droughts.
Made large distributions from tribal herds to progressive Indians, and stimulated Indian associations for the improvement of the grade of their live stock.
4. Modified the practice of leasing surplus allotted lands by requiring only the approval of the superintendent, thus expediting all such transactions.
5. Reports encouraging activity by Indians in all gainful employment connected with agriculture, manufactures, skilled workmanship, native industries, and miscellaneous occupations.
6. Expended individual moneys of the Five Civilized Tribes, approximating $2,800,000, for farms, buildings, live stock, equipment, and maintenance, and removed restrictions against alienation from 135,960 acres of their allotted lands.
7. Reports promising oil development in the Crow and Blackfeet Reservations, Mont., the Kiowa Reservation, Okla., and the Shoshone Reservation, Wyo.
8. New oil discoveries in the Osage Reservation (west side), Okla., have greatly increased production and leasing, the income on royalties and bonuses for the year having exceeded $15,000,000.
9. Shows greatly increased production on all irrigated lands and pushed several new projects, notably the diversion dam on the Gila River, Ariz., that will reclaim 35,000 acres, and on the Big Horn River, Mont., saving $750,000 worth of crops in the Crow Reservation.
10. Maintained successful forestry conditions despite a pronounced weakening in the demand for timber and resulting suspended shipments.
11. Took final action on 3,889 heirship cases, 308 wills, 69 reopened cases, about 3,600 miscellaneous probate matters, and collected fees to reimburse practically all of the appropriation made for such work.
12. Made over 7,000 allotments to Indians on reservations and 417 on the public domain, covering in all about 1,000,000 acres.
13. Issued 1,692 patents in fee to competent Indians, and discontinued the practice of recognizing as competent those of one-half or less Indian blood.
14. By deferring purchase of many supplies for return of cheaper prices saved approximately $117,000.
15. Work is being expedited in many reservations preparatory to the distribution of tribal funds.
1. Paid for pensions, $258,715,842.54.
2. Returned to the Treasury $20,414,539.35 of the amount appropriated for the payment of pensions.
3. Returned to the Treasury $82,949.34 of the sum appropriated for the maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries of special examiners.
4. Returned to the Treasury $223,941.37 of the amount appropriated for fees and expenses of examining surgeons, and $13,730.77 of the sum appropriated for per diem and expenses of special examiners.
5. Receipts for addresses, certified copies, etc. (act of Aug. 24, 1912), $7,432.46.
Refundments to pension appropriations, $5,951.30.
Miscellaneous receipts, $2,219.52.
6. Received and classified 117,872 applications for pension, of which 54,281 were under act of May 1, 1920, for Civil War service, and 45,774 under act of June 5, 1920, for Spanish War service.
7. Disposed of 91,515 pension claims and issued 53,272 pension certificates, 1,291 reissues in lieu of lost certificates, 9,478 accrued pension orders, and 3,328 reimbursement orders, on which $265,442.55 was allowed as reimbursement for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners.
8. Under act of May 22, 1920, for retirement of employees of the classified civil service, disbursed for annuities, $2,590,568.52; for refunds, $322,964.07; for Treasury settlement, $14.75.
9. Returned to the Treasury $1,326.80 of sums appropriated for cost of administration of the retirement act.
10. Allowed 6,186 of the 6,463 elaims for annuity on account of age and 581 of the 904 claims for annuity on account of disability.
11. Allowed 26,116 of the 33,500 claims for refund made by persons separated from the classified civil service.
12. The amount of the civil-service retirement and disability fund June 30, 1921, was $9,672,842.03.
1. On June 2, 1921, Dr. John James Tigert, professor of psychology in the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Ky., was appointed Commissioner of Education vice P. P. Claxton, resigned.
2. Reorganization of the administration of the bureau has been effected.
4. Conducted extensive correspondence with school officers and others on educational matters.
In all, 139,920 letters were received at the bureau.
Most of these inquiries were answered by means of form letters or by sending publications; in addition, approximately 40,000 personal letters were prepared and mailed out.
5. Printed and circulated 805,298 copies of printed bulletins, reports, and other doeuments, and 1,322,373 sheets of mimeographed material, consisting of circulars of information and other material.
6. Prepared 48 new educational bibliographies, revised 206 reference lists, compiled a monthly record of current educational publications and an annotated list of new educational books for publication in each issue of School Life.
7. Published 47 bulletins, 2 reports, 7 leaflets, 5 numbers in the health'education series, 8 health education supplements, 9 circulars, 14 reading courses, and 6 miscellaneous publications.
Also published School Life semimonthly.
8. Made, at the request of State and local authorities, nine educational surveys, including Wilmington, Del.
Wheeling, W. Va.
Elizabeth City, N. C.
Colorado Springs, Colo.
Washington, D. C.
Currituck County, N. C., University of Arkansas, University of Tennessee, and Massachusetts Agricultural College.
9. Completed the following studies in rural education: Facilities for preparation of rural teachers in the United States; salaries and shortage of rural teachers; systems for certificating teachers in the several States; educational prerequisites for teaching certificates; supervisors of rural schools in the United States; the school-building shortage in rural communities; standardization of rural schools.
10. Held 16 regional citizens' conferences on education, 20 regional and State conferences to consider the needs of rural education, 4 conferences on commercial education, conference to consider the special needs of education for Negroes, national conference on community centers, conference to consider the needs of the junior colleges, conference on education for highway engineering, and 4 conferences on industrial education.
11. Prepared material relating to salaries and appropriations of State higher institutions for use by officials of these institutions in campaigns for increased support before the State legislatures.
12. Audited the annual reports of the treasurers of land-grant colleges and prepared the annual statement of educational and financial statistics of these institutions.
13. Made special studies of school-building programs, salaries and shortage of teachers, and administration and supervision of schools in cities and towns.
14. Collected and compiled the school laws of the several States, especially current legislation.
Information and advice was given to legislators and others concerning educational legislation.
15. In educational extension work, received 7,117 requests for home reading courses, enrolled 1,435 new readers, and issued 68 certificates to persons completing reading courses.
Seven new reading courses were issued during the year, making a total of 18 now available; 14,435 persons have been enrolled in these courses.
Fifteen States are now cooperating with the bureau in this work.
16. Completed studies of methods and facilities for teaching home economics in colleges, universities, and normal schools; report on reorganization of home economies courses in secondary schools; and report on rural school hot lunches.
17. Continued work on investigation for the purpose of formulating a basis for courses of instruction in commercial education; prepared reports on special preparation for foreign service and commercial teacher training.
18. Promoted and encouraged health teaching in the schools.
Advice and suggestions given to school officers and others concerning schoolhouse planning and health education.
A limited amount of field investigation was made.
19. Gathered and evaluated information on educational movements and changing conditions in foreign countries, and the essentials made available for educators in this country.
20. The Alaskan force now consists of 6 superintendents, 134 teachers, 8 physicians, and 15 nurses.
Maintained 67 schools and two orphanages in Alaska.
Ten cooperative stores, several sawmills, canning factories, and agricultural projects are now in operation.
Managed the reindeer herds, including 216,000 reindeer, of which about 70 per cent belong to the natives.
21. Cooperated with the Biological Survey of the Department of Agriculture in a series of investigations looking toward the improvement of the reindeer industry.
22. Because of lack of appropriation, the following activities have been discontinued: Promotion of school-directed home gardening, the school board service division for assisting school officials in finding qualified teachers, promotion of community organization, cooperation with the National Geographic Society in the distribution of the weekly Geographic News Bulletin.
1. Surveyed geologically more than 4,600 square miles in detail, more than 23,000 square miles in reconnaissance surveys (about 1,500 in Alaska), and 18,000 square miles in exploratory surveys.
2. Continued cooperative geologic work with 17 State organizations, with Hawaii, and with Haiti and the Dominican Republic, and cooperated in research with the United States Reclamation Service, Bureau of Mines, Forest Service, Federal Power Commission, and other Government organizations.
3. Made studies of ore deposits in 10 States and prepared or began the preparation of 16 reports on ore deposits or mining districts.
4. Made field surveys and studies in 10 States with a view to determining the occurrence of oil and gas, began the preparation of State maps showing oil and gas fields, and published maps showing the fields in Louisiana and Texas.
5. Continued studies of the structure and oil resources of the 'Osage Indian Reservation in Oklahoma, prepared maps and reports on them for publication, and made further studies in other areas in that State with a view of directing successful search for oil and gas.
6. Studied deposits of oil shale in Colorado and Nevada and prepared for publication the manuscript of a general report on oil shales in the Rocky Mountain region.
7. Made studies of certain coal fields and prepared reports on fields in five States.
8. In a search for beds of potash salts in the Southwest discovered at three localities two or more potash-bearing beds that may prove to be of commercial value.
9. Investigated nitratebearing clays in the Mohave Desert and in the valley of Colorado River and adjacent parts of southeastern California and began the preparation of a report on them.
10. Continued studies of mineral deposits in Alaska.
11. Made topographic reconnaissance surveys of 770 square miles on the southern slope of the Alaska Range, in the headwater region of the Susitna basin, and in the Cook Inlet region, and geologic surveys elsewhere in Alaska of about 1,500 square miles.
12. Continued investigation of the water-power resources of southeastern Alaska.
13. Made collections and examinations of fossils from 21 States for stratigraphic identification or correlation.
14. Made more than 2,500 analyses of rocks, ores, minerals, and waters.
15. Continued observations of temperatures in deep wells to determine temperature gradients in oil-bearing and non oil-bearing areas.
16. Continued the colleetion of statistics of mineral production and cooperated in this work with other Government organizations, with State organizations, and with industrial associations.
17. Continued studies of foreign mineral resources so far as these may compete with domestic resources or affect domestic industries.
18. Maintained cooperation in topographic surveys with other Government organizations and with 20 States and Hawaii.
20. Ran 4,796 miles of levels and established in connection with them 1,123 permanent bench marks.
21. Made 576 linear miles of river surveys and ran 5,715 miles of road traverse.
22. Oecupied 122 triangulation stations, of which 78 were permanently marked, and ran primary-traverse lines aggregating 1,775 miles, setting in connection with them 394 permanent bench marks.
23. Continued compilation of the United States portion of the international map of the world, for which maps of 38 States have now been completed.
24. Published a relief map of the United States, showing the general relative heights of the land and depths of the sea, and began the preparation of relief maps of Ohio, Kentucky, Wyoming, central California, the Black Hills, and the Mississippi Valley.
25. Continued to supervise topographic surveys in the Dominican and Haitian republics, which were performed by topographic engineers of the Survey on furlough.
26. Continued measurements of stream flow throughout the United States and in Alaska and Hawaii, doing part of the work in cooperation with other Federal organizations and with 31 States and Hawaii.
27. Continued analyses and classification of surface waters of the United States.
28. Made ground-water investigations in 10 States and in Hawaii and continued analyses of samples of water.
29. Continued preparation and publication of guides to desert watering places in Arizona and California.
30. Continued investigations of the present and probable future use of surface and ground waters in connection with the classification of public lands.
31. Inereased areas in public water reserves by more than 5,600 acres.
32. Increased area designated under the ground-water reclamation act from 57,600 to 726,680 acres.
34. Made field reconnaissance investigations of the surface and ground-water resources of Nevada for the purpose of elassifying lands under the ground-water reclamation act.
35. Made field examinations in 11 States of land applied for under the enlarged-homestead and stoek-raising homestead laws.
36.
Increased designations of stock-raising lands from 74,000,000 to 105,000,000 acres.
37. Made reports on nearly 7,000 applications for oil and gas prospecting permits and reduced the oil and gas reserves by more than 60,000 acres.
38. Made reports on 249 applications for coal-prospecting permits and 78 applications for coal leases and reduced the coal-land reserves by more than 200,000 acres.
39. Defined as leasing territory 24 oil and gas producing "structures " containing more than 230,000 acres.
40. Made more than 7,500 reports on applications under the mineral-leasing laws.
41. Made surveys in five States for the purpose of elassifying lands with relation to their value in connection with the development of water power.
42. Made reports increasing the power-site reserves from 2,500,000 acres to more than 3,700,000 acres.
43. Disposed of more than 33,000 cases referred to the survey for the preparation of reports thereon to be used in the administration of the land laws.
44. Prepared statistical reports on the production of electricity and the consumption of fuel by public-utility power plants and continued mapping of transmission lines and power stations.
45. Prepared and published maps showing power stations and transmission lines in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland and assembled data for similar maps of other States.
46. Conducted an engineering investigation and prepared an exhaustive report on a proposed “superpower system"—a comprehensive system for the generation and distribution of electricity for the operation of railroads and manufacturing industries in the region between Boston and Washington.
47. Through cooperation with other Government scientific bureaus and scientific institutions furloughed members of the geologic staff to make special examinations in the West Indies, Central America, South America, the Philippines, and elsewhere.
48. Issued in the form of mimeograph press bulletins brief descriptions of prospective oil fields with structure contour maps, thus giving publicity to valuable results of field work with the least possible delay.
49. Published 133 reports, containing more than 10,600 pages, and reprinted 34 reports.
50. Engraved and printed 60 new topographic maps and engraved 20 new topographic maps, printing in all, of new and reprinted maps, more than 900,000 copies.
51. Printed under contract lithographed maps, charts, etc., for other branches of the Government in editions amounting to about 2,840,000 copies.
52. Distributed through the office of the Superintendent of Documents more than 619,000 books and sent out directly more than 12,000 books and 740,000 maps, of which mąre than 550,000 were sold.
1. Continued the construction and operation of irrigation works, and actually irrigated in 1920 more than 1,223,000 acres of arid land, covered by project statistics, producing crops valued at nearly $66,172,000.
Including land furnished either in whole or in part with water from the works of the service, under the Warren Act, the value of crops produced in 1920 amounted to nearly $114,000,000.
2. Increased the area irrigated and covered by crop census more than 38,000 acres over that of the previous year.
3. Operated irrigation works, including 40 reservoirs, 31 power plants, more than 13,000 miles of canals and drains, as well as pipe lines, flumes, and tunnels, and thousands of structures, such as dams, head gates, weirs, checks, drops, etc.
4. Continued the extension of the projects, ineluding the construction of 381 miles of canals and drains, more than 6,000 canal structures, 441 bridges, 125,634 linear feet of pipe, and 197 flumes, and excavated more than 9,000,000 cubic yards of earth and rock.
5. Investigated the feasibility of a dam in Boulder Canyon on the Colorado River to impound water for the irrigation of lands in Imperial Valley, Calif.
6. Continued preliminary work in connection with the proposed American Falls dam on the Snake River, Idaho.
7. Investigated the possibilities of another large international project on the lower Rio Grande, which will necessitate the negotiation of a treaty with Mexico.
8. Resumed construction of the Tieton Dam to supplement the supply of storage water on the Yakima project, Washington.
9. Began construction of part 1 of the Yuma Mesa Division, comprising about 6,400 acres, which were sold during the preceding year under the terms of the act of Congress of January 25, 1917.
10. Cooperated with other departments of the Government, with other bureaus of the Interior Department, with State governments, and with numerous local project organizations in the furtherance of reclamation work and the interests of the water users.
1. Trained 12,525 miners in rescue and first-aid methods, as compared with 10,177 in the fiscal year 1920.
3. Developed scientific systems of classifying export coals into "pools " by systematie sampling and analysis to supersede the arbitrary classifications used in wartime, in cooperation with three of the largest seaboard coal exchanges.
4. Inspected and sampled coal purchased by the United States Government departments, as well as coal for export to Switzerland and the Netherlands.
5. Assisted the Government departments in their fuel problems by technical advice and assistance.
6. Demonstrated proper appliances and ways for saving natural gas in the home.
7. By examination and study of conditions in various oil fields, petroleum engineers of the bureau, through advice and assistance to the operators, saved many thousand dollars' worth of oil and gas that would otherwise have been wasted.
8. Demonstrated that losses occurring from evaporation of crude oil in storage and transit are of great magnitude and can be reduced largely by the application of methods it recommended.
9. Cooperated with the Indian Office in improving operations on oil land owned by Indian tribes.
10. Assisted the Treasury Department in devising improved methods for estimating values of oil properties.
11. Developed improved methods of using mixtures of low-grade mid-western coal and coke rather than high-grade eastern coke alone as fuel in water-gas sets.
12. Developed an improved method of separating water from tar in tar emulsions from water-gas sets.
13. Made further progress in the investigation of methods for preparing and utilizing lignite, which constitutes the greater part of the nation's fuel resources.
14. Determined and reported to the superpower survey that it is not economically feasible to process coal for recovery of by-products at very large power plants.
15. Completed a comprehensive report on recent developments in electric brass melting and electric brass furnaces.
16. Investigated properties of molybdenum and cerium steels.
17. Determined that scrap losses in casting aluminum, amounting to $1,200,000 yearly, are largely preventable, as are melting losses, aggregating about $3,000,000 yearly.
18. Prepared a comprehensive bulletin on the manufacture, properties, and uses of aluminum alloys.
19. Investigated methods for preparing caustic magnesia and determined that high-grade magnesia can be made from some varieties of magnesite hitherto believed to be unsuitable for this purpose.
20. Investigated dolomite as a substitute for the more costly magnesite in preparing refractories.
Developed methods for concentrating the magnesia content in dolomite by removal of lime content, and obtained from Ohio dolomite a product superior in magnesia content to imported Canadian magnesite.
21. Completed the testing of white clays collected from various deposits throughout the United States, with the result that several clays were found suitable for making china and white pottery.
22. Devised a process for collecting radium emanation from radium salts.
23. Continued testing and experimental work on míning explosives with reference to increased safety and efficiency.
24. Prepared regulations for the operation of coal mines on the public domain under the leasing act.
25. Organized a staff which is supervising effectively the enforcement of leasing regulations on oil and gas lands and on the coal, oilshale, phosphate, and sodium lands of the public domain.
26. Assisted the Territorial Government of Alaska in revising the mining statutes of that Territory.
27. Investigated fires and explosions at coal mines, with a view to offering recommendations that will make mining safer.
28. Continued to study methods of washing coal in Illinois and Washington, with the result that improvements in recovery and in the quality of the washed coal have been effected in many plants.
29. Continued a study of the industrial use of liquid oxygen explosives, and conducted experiments and tests with this type of explosive.
30. Made definite progress in investigating ventilation in metal mines, as it relates to the health and efficiency of the miners; also in the companion problems of rock dust in metal mines, and the temperature and humidity of mine workings.
31. Completed an investigation, in cooperation with the State of Colorado, of the low-grade ores of Colorado.
32. Continued a study of iron-mining methods in the Lake Superior region and extended this work to the Birmingham district.
33. Cooperated with the State of Utah in preparing coal-mine safety regulations which were adopted and put into effect by the Utah Legislature.
34. In cooperation with the State of Utah and Salt Lake City, effeeted regulations and improved methods for reducing smoke in the city.
35. Demonstrated that large quantities of oil may be recovered from surface outcrops of oil and tar sands.
36. In a survey of the crude petroleum of the United States, completed and published analyses, made on a comparable basis, of representative samples of crudes from all eastern fields and Rocky Mountain fields, thus affording purchasers a means of comparing different crudes and of judging their relative value.
37. Developed a process for treating gasoline to remove objectionable sulphur compounds, thus making some grades suitable for export that were not available heretofore.
38. In cooperation with the States of Utah and Colorado, investigated American oil shales and methods of refining them, and prepared a bulletin on the subject.
39. Developed a convenient and reliable retort for assaying oil shales for their oil yield.
40. Continued an investigation of the slate-quarrying industry, and brought methods for prevention of waste and utilization of unavoidable waste to the attention of operators.
41. Completed a study of the tale industry, and pointed out improved methods for reducing waste in mining and preparation, and for improving the quality of the product.
42. Rendered advice and assistance to numerous mine operators, mill operators, miners, prospectors, and others on problems connected with the mining, mineral, and metallurgical industries.
43. Studied blast-furnace operations with regard to smelting lowgrade manganese ores.
44. Continued on a much larger seale an investigation of the heat treatment of drill steels as related to breakage in use.
45. Developed improved methods for separating sphalerite from fluorspar in ore not amenable to methods ordinarily used in fluorspar mills.
46. Showed zinc-mill operators of the Wisconsin district how to save most of the fine ore that had been going to waste in tailings from the mills.
47. Prepared a bulletin on the volatilization process for recovering metals from low-grade ores carrying lead, silver, zinc, or copper, and tested numerous ores to determine whether the process was suited to them, with the result that a number of operators are erecting volatilization units at their mines.
48. Practically completed the development of a better form of oxygen breathing apparatus, which is much lighter than the present Gibbs apparatus and embodies numerous mechanical improvements.
49. Arranged and conducted a national first-aid meet at Denver, Colo., in which 68 teams and 18 mining States participated; also assisted in numerous State and local meets, which have done much to popularize safety work.
50. Developed a small light gas mask for city firemen; also a pocket mask for protecting railroad locomotive crews from smoke in passing through tunnels.
51. In cooperation with the Publie Health Service and the New York and New Jersey State tunnel.commissions, completed tests for determining the amount of carbon monoxide given off by motor vehicles and the permissible concentration in tunnels.
Continued experimental work on the removal of gases from tunnels.
52. Supervised the work of the Government fuel yard in the District of Columbia, which during the year handled 269,180 tons of coal, 666 cords of wood, 1,426 bushels of charcoal, and 77 tons of coke.
This fuel was distributed to a total of about 800 points.
1. Handled the largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the parks: 1921 season, 1,007,336; 1920 season, 919,504; 1919 season, 755.325; 1918 season, 451,661; 1917 season, 488,268; 1916 season, 356,- 097: 1915 season, 334,799.
2. Automobile travel to the parks during the 1921 season, 175,825 cars; 1920 season, 128,074 cars; 1919 season, 97,721 cars; 1918 season, 53,966 ears; 1917 season, 54,692 cars; 1916 season, 29,358 cars.
3. Handled the largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the national monuments: 1921 season, 164,461; 1920 season, 138,951; 1919 season, 56,191.
4. Collected $396,928.27 in revenues from the various operations within the national parks, as against $316,877.96 in 1920 and $196,- 678.03 in 1919.
5. The Hot Springs Reservation given park status by congressional action.
6. Dedicated the Hawaii National Park to its purpose as a recreation and pleasuring ground for the Nation.
7. Arranged for active administration of the Hawaii National Park as such.
8. Assumed active administration of the Mount MeKinley National Park as such and instituted patrolling service to protect its game śupply.
9. Arranged for the survey and marking of the Mount McKinley National Park boundaries and of the Chaco Canyon and Petrified Forest National Monuments boundaries by the General Land Office.
10. Arranged with the various public operators for increased accommodations and conveniences in the various parks where necessary, particularly in the Rocky Mountain, the Yosemite, and Crater Lake National Parks.
11. Expanded the free public automobile camp grounds in the various parks to meet inereased demands of inflowing motorists and erected several community houses for their accommodation in the Yellowstone National Park.
12. In the Yosemite National Park installed an adequate up-to-date sewer system which will provide proper sanitation for the Yosemite Valley, its chief scenic attraction, where a large summer population stays each year.
13. Through landscape engineering division prepared ground plans for the development of several of the national parks, effected construetion of new buildings in harmony with their surroundings, whether for the service or for various publie operators, and cooperated in laying out roads and trails to develop all possible scenie accents.
14. Through civil engineering division prepared surveys for important roads and trails, supervised the construction of existing road projects, prepared plans and specifications for standard designs for culverts, minor housing structures, and the like, and investigated other needs of various parks and monuments from a civil engineering standpoint.
15. Completed construction of the new free bathhouse in the Hot Springs National Park, which will be dedicated to the use of the indigent sick of the land.
16. Constructed a suspension bridge across the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon National Park, thereby enabling horseback travel between the north and south rims.
17. Began construction of three important new road projects within national park borders, which will be continued to completion under annual appropriation by Congress, namely, the Transmountain Road in Glacier National Park, the Carbon River Road in Mount Rainier National Park, and the Middle Fork Road in the Sequoia National Park.
18. Began permanent hard-surfacing of the Rim Road in Grand Canyon National Park and improved famous Fall River Road in Rocky Mountain National Park in Colorado by eliminating unsafe curves and switchbacks.
19. Secured cooperation of the United States Public Health Service in making sanitary inspections of the major parks and remedied insanitary conditions found.
Developed plans for sewage disposal and for expansion of water supply systems to meet increasing needs of the parks.
20. Secured donation of valuable tracts of land for enlargement of the Lafayette National Park in Maine, through the personal efforts of the superintendent, George B. Dorr.
21. Secured donation of moneys to acquire private holdings lying within the Sequoia National Park in California.
22. Accepted gifts of tracts of land to Muir Woods National Monument, which were added to the monument by presidential proclamation.
23. Secured investigations of large tracts of land containing redwoods, both sempervirens and gigantea species, in cooperation with the Save the Redwoods League and other organizations, with a view to further conservation of these rapidly diminishing trees.
24. In cooperation with the States and private parties and the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the Interior Department, continued efforts to save strips of timber along highways leading to and from parks to preserve their sylvan beauty.
25. Gave special attention to conservation of wild life in the parks and monuments by reducing predatory animals and secured cooperation of various States in the establishment or enlargement of State game preserves and in amplifying State game laws.
26. Planted large consignments of fish fry and fingerlings in various lakes and streams of our larger parks in cooperation with the United States Bureau of Fisheries or State fish commissions in order to insure best possible fishing in these areas.
27. Safeguarded the famous inscriptions on Inseription Rock that form the chief historic treasure of the El Morro National Monument by the construction of protecting railings that will -prevent visitors from marring the inscription and by erasing names, initials, and other engravings of vandals placed on the rock.
28. Established ranger service in the Petrified Forest National Monument to aid visitors by giving correet information and to prevent the carrying away of petrified wood by tourists and others.
29. Continued signing of the parks with standard signs for protection and for guidance of visitors and began the uniform signing of the various monuments.
30. Stimulated interest in the creation of State parks throughout the country through a State park conference held in Des Moines, Iowa.
31. Continued and expanded the work of informing the publie about the national parks and monuments under the jurisdiction of this service.
32. Prepared 320,000 and distributed 306,000 publications relating to these recreational areas.
33. Prepared and distributed 193,000 automobile maps of the national parks.
Continued the circulation of available lantern slide and motion picture material showing scenes in the national parks and monuments.
34. Lent many photographs of important national park and monument scenes for exhibition purposes in this country and abroad.
35. Cooperated with highway, automobile, and other associations, as well as newspapers and magazines, in the dissemination of information regarding the national parks and monuments.
36. Cooperated with the National Parks Association, various universities, and other organizations in the dissemination of information jeading to a broader use and appreciation of the national parks and monuments.
37. Secured the continuation of the course of lectures on the natural attractions of the park in the Yosemite National Park and continued the free nature guide service therein, and also enlarged service to the traveling public in the various parks in understanding and appreciating the natural exhibits, including their flora and fauna.
38. Cooperated with scientific and educational institutions in their effort to conduct research work in the Chaco Canyon National Monument.
39. Cooperated with the Smithsonian Institution in their exploration work in the Mesa Verde National Park.
40. Fostered the development of museum exhibits in Yellowstone, Rocky Mountain, Sequoia, Yosemite, and Mesa Verde National Parks and at the Casa Grande National Monument for the information and education of the public.
41. Maintained high efficiency of entire national park organization, both in the field and in Washington under heavy demands made by unprecedented influx of tourists into parks and monuments.
42. In addition to above instances of specific accomplishments, kept up the maintenance and improvement work of existing facilities in the parks and monuments to a satisfactory standard with the funds made available by congressional appropriations.
The following table shows the number of matters received and disposed of during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1921—that is, the matters docketed or recorded; but it does not include a very large number of miscellaneous matters of which no formal record is kept.
Last year's report showed 368 pending land appeals on July 1, 1920.
This was an error.
The actual number was 531.
The error was in the omission of one month's receipts—163 cases—that is, there were actually docketed during the year ending June 30, 1920, 1,984 appeals instead of 1,821, as reported.
The total number of appeals was therefore 2,413 instead of 2,250, and the disposition of 1,882 of these cases left pending, on July 1, 1920, 531 cases.
Comparison with the report for last year shows a material reduetion in the number of pending land appeals—429, July 1, 1919; 531, July 1, 1920; and 417, July 1, 1921.
But the reduction in pending cases of all elasses (“ Summary ") is not marked—from 776 in 1920 to 740 in 1921.
In other words, the average monthly output of the force numerically the same has increased from 757 in the first quarter to 1,382 in the last quarter.
The increase is not confined to miscellaneous matters, but includes publie-land appeals as well—an increase from a monthly average of 128 in the first quarter to 207 in the last quarter.
Of cases against the department in the courts situate in this district, there has been during the year a final disposition in one court or another of 29 suits.
The decisions were favorable to the department in 25 instances, adverse in 4.
No cases in the Supreme Čourt of this distriet (13) were lost.
In the Court of Appeals 6 out of 7 were won, and the 1 unfavorable decision was by a divided court.
In the Supreme Court of the United States, where the department is not represented by this office, 9 cases against the Secretary were disposed of, 3 of which were lost.
Fifteen new actions were filed during the year.
There are now pending 26 cases, as follows: Supreme Court, 6; Court of Appeals, 4; Supreme Court of the District, 16.
Of the latter, 3 decisions in interlocutory matters prior to the close of the fiscal year indicate favorable final decisions.
Area of land entered and patented.
The total area of publie and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiseal year ended June 30, 1921, is 15,631,630.96 acres, not including 315,915.71 acres embraced in finals not heretofore counted as original disposition of land.
The latter area is constituted as follows: Public auetion, 119,138.82 acres; abandoned military reservations, 8,315.63 acres; cash and private sales, individual claimants and small holding claims, 29,133.19 acres; preemption entries, 12,178.38 acres; soldiers' additional homesteads, 5,614.76 acres; timber and stone entries, 80,668.55 acres; mineral entries, 57,472.16 acres; coal entries, 3,394.02 acres.
The area of 15,631,630.96 acres is a decrease of 805,860.59 acres, as compared with the area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 1920.
Of the total area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 1921, 10,313,732.89 acres were allowed under the stock-raising homestead act of December 29, 1916.
The area patented during the fiscal year is 10,117,809.751 acres, a decrease of 1,732,591.586 acres, as compared with the fiscal year 1920.
Of the above area 8,172,802.160 acres were patented under the homestead laws, a decrease of 1,067,101.096 acres, not including as homesteads 8,424.16 acres patented as soldiers' additional entries.
Cash receipts and expenditures.
The total cash receipts from sales, leases, and other disposition of public lands (including reclamation water-right charges and receipts for copies of records, sales of Government property, etc.) for the fiscal year 1921 were $10,486,314.36; from sales of Indian lands, $903,371.93; and from leases of naval petroleum reserve lands, $3,118,511.07, an aggregate of $14,508,197.36, all of which was deposited in the Treasury.
Five per cent of the net receipts from cash sales of public lands are paid to the public land States within which such sales were made, and the balance of such net receipts from the States included within the reclamation act, together with the net receipts from fees and commissions from the same States, are paid into the reclamation fund: 90 per cent of the receipts under the mineral leasing act from lands outside of naval petroleum reserves are divided between the States from which the minerals (principally oil) were taken and the reclamation fund; the receipts from sales of reclamation town sites, sales of lands in the Yuma auxiliary reclamation project, and royalties and rentals from potash deposits are deposited directly into the reclamation fund; the receipts from sales of Indian lands are deposited to the credit of the various Indian tribes; and the receipts from leases of naval petroleum lands are deposited to the credit of the naval petroleum fund.
All other moneys received were covered into the Treasury to the credit of the general fund.
It will be noted by the above table that, after deposit of receipts for the benefit of special purposes, reclamation fund, State fund, naval reserve funds, and Indian trust funds, there remains a balance of $1,794,905.16 to the credit of the general fund to be appropriated by Congress.
It will also be noted in the following paragraphs that the total expenditures for the conduet of the business of the General Land Office and the trusts imposed upon it amounted to $3,149,024.05, from which it will be seen that the cost of operation of the General Land Office is $1,354,118.89 greater than the amount credited from its receipts to the general fund and that this amount for the operation of the Land Office is appropriated by Congress from revenue derived from other sources.
Attention is called to this matter for the reason that there appears to have been an understanding in the past that the proceeds from the sales of public lands provided a source of revenue in excess of the needs of the General Land Office, which might be used to finance other activities of the Government.
As will appear from the foregoing, the revenues of $14,508,197.36, less $903,371.93 Indian funds, is more than four times the cost of the administration of the business of the General Land Office, including the surveys of public lands, but Congress has by general appropriations devoted all of said proceeds to other uses, except the percentage, amounting last year to $1,794,- 905.16, credited to the Treasury general fund.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers and incidental expenses during the fiscal year 1921 were $852,196.45.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys made from the appropriation for surveying the public lands outside of railroad land grant limits, were $3,149,024.05.
Disbursements from the following special deposit trust funds and reimbursable appropriations are not included in the above figures as receipts or expenditures: From deposits by individuals for surveying public lands, $82,059.96; from surveying within land grants (reimbursable), $71,157.49; from completing surveys within railroad land grants, $1,485.59; from opening Indian reservations (reimbursable), $4,416.88; from deposits by individuals for resurveys, $499.40; from deposits for surveys of private lands, $10.44; from surveying and allotting Indian reservations (reimbursable), $14,146.89; and from Indian moneys, proceeds of labor, surveying, etc. (Crow act of June 4, 1920), $8,619.58.
Field service.
The total amount of cash collected and turned into the United States Treasury as a result of the work of the field force was $106,050.71; of this amount $54,131.90 was in settlement of timber and coal cases, and $8,082.84 was secured from timber sales; $43,835.97 was recovered through proceedings instituted by the Department of Justice in cases of depredations on the public lands and violations of the public land laws.
In addition there was turned into the Treasury $8,775.01, which represents royalty on coal mined from a tract in Colorado.
As a result of investigations in the field, 117,565 acres have been restored during the year to the public domain.
Of this amount 75,840 acres represent fraudulent entries canceled through proceedings based upon special agents' reports; 41,725 aceres restored to the open range by the abatement of unlawful inclosures without suit.
Special agents investigated and reported 21,134 cases, 4,328 of which were adversely and 16,806 favorably reported.
Two hundred and nineteen hearings in Government contest cases have been held.
Civil suits in 55 eases were recommended to the Department of Justice as the result of investigation; 52 cases were tried in court, of which 45 were won and 7 lost.
As a result of the prosecution of these suits $40,036.97 was recovered, and 3,840.40 acres were restored to the public domain, of which 1,960 acres had been unlawfully inclosed.
Of the criminal cases tried during the year 31 resulted in convictions, in which there were 13 prison sentences imposed and fines amounting to $3,799 paid.
Surveys.
The Commissioner calls attention to the fact that our remaining publie lands present many difficulties in the prosecution of the work, so that mere acreage or mileage is no longer a fair test as to actual accomplishments in the field.
Of surveys that can be properly measured on a mileage basis, 25,420 linear miles were run in the United States proper and Alaska during the fiscal year, approximately the same amount as that of last year and with a slightly decreased cost, due largely to more satisfactory labor conditions and field transportation.
During the year that is past, 7,179,412 acres of surveys and resurveys were accepted.
The Commissioner submits a summary of reports from the offices of the surveyors general, as well as a consolidated work report showing amount of work performed in each surveyor general's office during the year and the amount of work pending at the beginning and end of the fiscal year.
Map making and drafting.
The manuscript for the 1922 edition of the United States map has been brought up to June 30, 1921, and the copper plates are now in the hands of the engraver for additions and corrections.
The population schedules of the 1920 census are being used for revision of city and town names.
Tract-book notations.
The total number of tract-book notations for the present year was 388,456, as compared with 396,324 the year previous.
This total includes 68,149 appeals and other miscellaneous cases; petitions to designate under the acts of February 19, 1909, and December 29, 1916; 6,284 Indian allotments; 36,007 final and cash certificates; 58,560 original entries, and 1,490 plats.
Homestead and kindred entries.
At the beginning of the fiscal year there were pending in this line of work 6,524 cases; during the year 63,816 cases wére received as against 86,684 the previous year.
There are now pending and unacted upon 9,715 eases.
Stock-raising homesteads.
At the present time 62,401 stock-raising homestead entries have been made since the passage of the act, covering an area of 24,337,816.28 acres; while the Geological Survey has received 92,325 petitions for designation and acted upon 84,882, having designated up to the present time 105,960,264 acres, which includes a considerable area already covered by entries or applications.
In 1921, 4,299 patents, covering an acreage of 1,249,592.63 acres, were issued, and since the passage of the act 5,731 patents, embracing an acreage of 1,630,596.34 acres, have been issued.
Soldiers’ additional homestead rights.
During the year 111 new applications were received, as against 327 the previous year.
Final action has been taken during the year on 281 cases, leaving now pending 221.
Stock driveways.
During the year the Secretary of the Interior has withdrawn 230,164 acres for stock driveway purposes and released 112,821 acres from such withdrawal.
The total gross area included in driveway withdrawals at the elose of the fiscal year is. 9,015,601 acres.
T'ownsite, town-lot, and kindred entries.
Thirteen townsite and kindred entries were made, six of which entries were approved for patenting and seven are still pending.
Town-lot entries to the number of 2,120 were received, of which there were approved 1,939, involving 2,300 lots.
Public offerings of town lots were made at Myton, Utah; Plummer, Idaho; Desmet, Idaho; Dupree, S. Dak.
Parker, Ariz.
Minnesota drainage act.
Rights of way.
There were 92 applications received during the year for railroad rights of way, as against 49 the year previous, while 418 applications for other rights of way for irrigation and miscellaneous purposes were received, as against 453 the previous year.
Of these cases the office made final disposition of 454, and has now on hand awaiting action 299.
Forfeiture cases.
One hundred and ninety-eight approved rights of way subject to forfeiture for nonconstruction or for misuse were reported during the year and 255 finally disposed of.
Stock watering reservoirs.
One hundred and eighty-one reservoir declaratory statements were received or docketed during the past year, and there are now on hand awaiting action 98.
State irrigation distriets.
During the year four applications under the act of August 11, 1916, having a total area of 808,868.90 acres, received departmental approval.
At the end of the year 11 applications under this act were awaiting action in the General Land Office.
Private irrigation projects.
One hundred and six new reports and 16 supplemental reports have been received during the year involving projects upon which applicants under the desert-land laws are dependent for their water supplies.
Reports on 89 irrigation companies have received final action; in 45 cases, affecting approximately 300 desert-land entries, the conclusions reached were in favor of recognition of the project; in 27 cases, affecting about 80 entries, the conclusions reached were adverse; while 17 cases were closed without any definite conclusion having been reached, it appearing there were no longer any desert lands involved therein.
Federal water-power act.
The work under the proviso to section 24 of this act has increased the work of the Land Office considerably; nearly 600 elections to take the land, with a reservation to the Government or its licensees of the right to enter and use the same for power purposes, have been already called for by the office.
One hundred and sixteen power-site applications have been received, involving 552,699 acres of land, 319,661 acres of which are in national forests and 233,038 acres public land.
Uarey Aet.
Segregations aggregating 210,746.39 acres were disposed of during the year.
Of this area 76,381.02 acres were patented to the several States as reclaimed and 134,365.37 acres represent segregations which were canceled.
An additional area of 5,178.15 acres was segregated and 12,037.49 acres were covered by new withdrawals, while the period of segregation was extended for 54,634.22 acres.
Desert lands.
During the year 6,744 applications and entries of all descriptions were received and 6,564 disposed of, leaving 7,630 pending, of which number 6,660 are either suspended or awaiting fulfillment of requirements made on entrymen.
Sixteen hundred and eleven final desert-land entries were received and 1,644 disposed of, 1,599 of which were patented.
Sixteen hundred and fifty-five final entries are now pending.
Reclamation homesteads.
Pending at the beginning of the fiseal year, 351 original homestead entries; received, 814; canceled, 124; allowed, 356; additional evidence called for in 498 cases, of which 338 are still pending awaiting further showing, leaving 347 cases pending office action.
Pending at the beginning of the year, final homestead entries, 109; received, 690; approved for patenting, 428; additional evidence called for in 105 cases, in 47 of which the required showing has not yet been made, leaving 327 awaiting office action.
Irrigation of arid lands in Nevada.
The commissioner reports inereased activity under the act of October 22, 1919, known as the Pittman Act, for the development of underground waters in Nevada.
From Elko, Nev., 79 applications were received, and from Carson City, 398, involving approximately 1,000,000 acres of land.
Forty permits have been issued in the Elko land district and 257 in the Carson City land distriet.
Withdrawals and restorations.
During the past year 3,071,401 acres of public land were withdrawn or placed in a state of reservation under the various acts applicable thereto, and 935,539 acres theretofore withdrawn were restored.
The commissioner furnishes a statement showing the specifie acreage withdrawn or restored under the several acts authorizing sueh action.
Restoration and openings under Pubtic Resolution No. 29.—Since the submission of the last report, 676,012 acres have been released from withdrawals or segregation subject to the preference right of ex-service men of the war with Germany, and 2,234,380 acres opened through surveys or resurveys subject to the same preference.
State grants and State selections.
In the past fiscal year 738,354.68 acres of indemnity school lands and 175,176.33 acres of specifie quantity grant lands were conveyed to the States.
In addition, 14,246.43 acres of indemnity school lands and 1,184.46 acres of quantity grant selections were rejected and canceled, the total acreage adjudicated being 928,961.90 acres.
Receipts amounted to 247.115.83 acres of indemnity school land selections and 15,823.90 acres of selections under grants in quantity for specifie purposes; total, 262,839.73 acres.
There were 18,825.33 acrés of land conveyed to the States with reservations of mineral deposits to the United States, and 9,490.56 acres under cooperative agreements with some of the States, which provide for the exchange of school section lands within the boundaries of national forests for other lands within such boundaries; the total amount of lands so far conveyed to the States under these agreements aggregates 248,428.42 acres.
Swamp and overflowed lands.
Patents issued for 2,993.75 acres; claims for 30,547.95 acres were rejected; and new claims for 32,442.35 acres were made of record.
Railroad grants and selections.
Railroad and wagon road selections were received during the year to the amount of 1,397,546.30 acres, and 713,210.32 acres were certified and patented.
Settlers on railroad lands in Montana.
In 11 cases, involving 3,040 aeres, in which the company had refused to relinquish under the act of February 28, 1919, it reconsidered its action and filed relinquishments for the benefit of settlers, making a total of 16,945.38 acres relinquished under the said act.
The Dalles military road.
Under the decision of the department dated January 24, 1917, finding that this company was still entitled to 36,066.55 acres in satisfaction of its grant there has been patented a total of 28,913.60 acres.
Pending selections for the remainder are held awaiting reports from the field.
Coos Bay wagon road lands.
One sale of timber on a tract of 560 aeres of these lands is reported, for which $50,037.38 was received; this with the sales reported last year makes the total receipts from such sales $80,811.30.
Oregon and California railroad lands.
In the adjustment of the accrued and unpaid taxes under'the provisions of the revestment act the Secretary of the Treasury was authorized during the year to pay to the several counties in the State of Oregon entitled thereto an additional amount of taxes for the years 1913, 1914, and 1915 on unsold, unpatented lands, amounting to $40,967.64; the total amount of taxes paid on the revested lands to the present time is $1,571,044.05.
In the year that is past sales of timber were made on 8,715.80 acres, for which $358,065.19 was received.
The sales of timber from said lands total to date $738,977.46.
Abandoned military reservations.
The eommissioner reports a number of sales under the act of July 5, 1884, and August 23, 1894, and supplemental legislation at Fort MeKinney, Wyo., and Camp Bowie, Ariz.
Chippewa logging.
There were cut from ceded Chippewa lands under lumber contracts made pursuant to the act of June 27, 1902, timber for which there was received the sum of $15,998.71; a sum of $4,681.95 was collected for timber cut in trespass; the sum of $18,- 653.47 as interest, and $6,693.43 as overhead charges were collected to cover extensions of time granted purchasers of timber to cut and remove the same; the total receipts on account of Chippewa logging during the year were $46,027.56.
Indian allotments.
Patents in trust were issued to Indians for 220,570.10 acres, and patents in fee simple for an area of 487,612,987 acres.
Public sales of Indian land.
Approximately 20,000 acres in Coeur d'Alene Indian Reservation, Idaho, were offered for sale, resulting in a sale of 5,094.47 acres, for which $6,211.06 was received.
Seventy thousand acres in the Cheyenne River and Standing Rock Reservation were sold for $175,000, or $2.50 per acre.
Lieu selections for lands in Indian reservations.
There were patented under the act of April 21, 1904, 23,117.83 acres in lieu of lands embraced within Indian reservations.
Lieu selections for lands in National Forests.
In the past year there were approved for patenting 273 selections, and 46 selections were canceled.
There are yet pending about 400 forest lieu selections in the various branches of the Land Department.
Mining claims.
Mineral entries received, 574; disposed of, 565; pending, 469.
Coal entries received, 59; disposed of, 66; pending, 14.
Mineral contests received, 94; disposed of, 119; pending, 64.
Prospecting permits and leases.
Sodium permits—12 applications allowed and 10 rejected.
Potash—150 applications for potash prospecting permits received, 111 allowed and 37 denied; 14 applications for patent based on discovery received, 2 rejected and 12 allowed; 12 applications for potash lease received and 1 lease issued, covering 2,200 acres in Searles Lake, Calif.
Phosphate—20 applications for phosphate received, 4 of which were rejected and 1 lease granted.
Coal—prospecting permits were issued to 55 applicants; 4 leases and 4 licenses were issued covering, respetively, 83,391, 4,230, and 160 acres of coal land.
Alaska coal leases.
Three leases were issued, covering 4,520 acres, making a total of seven leases outstanding, covering 6,540 aeres of land in the Bering River field, 2,520 in the Matanuska field, 1,400 acres in the Cook Inlet, and 566 acres in the Nenana field.
Oil and gas prospecting permits.
Eleven thousand and fifty-five applications for oil prospecting permits under sections 13 and 20 of the mineral leasing act had been received of record on July 1, 1921.
Of the applications received, final disposition has been made in the year past of 3,256 by permits granted and of 1,537 by final rejection.
In the same time 3,762 applications have been held for rejection subject to appeal and awaiting action elsewhere, and there are now 2,500 applications pending on which no action has as yet been taken.
Oil and gas leases.
Thirteen leases were issued under section 14 of the leasing act in the past year to elaimants under oil and gas prospecting permits alleging a discovery of oil on the land.
These leases cover 160 acres of land in Louisiana, 1,620 acres in Montana, and 640 acres in California.
Three leases in Wyoming, covering 1,600 acres, and two leases in California, covering 640 acres, were issued pursuant to auction sale under section 17 of the leasing act.
Total amount of royalties paid on past production under leases issued under section 14 was $6,346.70; total bonus paid for leases sold under section 17 of the act, $1,040,610.50.
Relief cases under the mineral leasing act.
At the end of the fiscal year 160 leases, covering 17,727 acres, and 105 prospecting permits, covering 79,781 acres, had been issued, and 163 applications rejected or otherwise disposed of.
The total back royalties collected under this line of cases aggregates $8,334,589.76, of which amount $382,050 is in Liberty bonds and Victory notes at par.
National Forests.
There are now 149 National Forests, embracing 181,820,459 acres, of which a little over 86 per cent is public lands.
The net increase in National Forest areas since the beginning of the fiscal year is 1,520,683 acres.
Contests.
The General Land Office has disposed of 909 litigated eases during the year aside from mineral contests, and 2,553 contests were disposed of by cancellation of entries on default or by abatement or dismissal of the contest.
Patents.
Fifty-two thousand seven hundred and eighty-five patents, embracing 10,117,809.75 acres, were issued in the year ending June 30, 1921.
Repayments.
Under the several statutes authorizing repayments there were stated during the last fiscal year 1,764 accounts, allowing repayment of $112,525.59.
The number of claims allowed includes 82 accounts, authorizing repayment of $10,146.47 received in connection with sales of various Indian lands and repaid in Indian trust funds.
Revitalized schools.
With a view to overcoming war-time handicaps to Indian education, planș are outlined for thoroughly constructive work under approaching normal conditions.
A chief supervisor of education has been appointed who, with the assistance of six school supervisors, has organized the Indian country into districts and effected systematic supervision therein.
The object will be to establish unity and uniformity of effort and practice throughout Government schools and to secure practical cooperation with State public school officials wherever there is a prospect of increasing the attendance of Indian children in the public schools.
Careful revision of the course of study has been made.
Temporary instructors are being replaced by permanent employees in academic and industrial lines.
Compulsory education laws and regulations of the States in which Indians reside have been adopted as a means of closer and more effective relations with publie school authorities.
Government day schools will be strengthened.
Greater emphasis will be given to the study of English in the lower grades, and localities now lacking in school facilities will be better supplied.
Health.
Various epidemies appearing on several reservations were controlled without serious fatal issues, with the exception of typhus fever on the San Juan Reservation, N. Mex., where 21 deaths occurred out of 52 cases among the Indians.
A. vigorous campaign against this disease promptly checked its threatened spread and was of great educational value to the Indians.
The year shows an excess of Indian births over deaths.
More permanent service is being secured in positions of physicians and nurses.
Medical aid for the Indians does not stop with the important work of dispensing remedies to the sick; it is distinetly preventive and educational; it stresses the doctrine that the hope of the Indian race lies in its children, and seeks through their training an improved heredity evolved from the practice of sanitation, hygiene, and the laws of social purity.
Farming and stock raising.
Last year 49,962 Indians cultivated 890,700 aeres of land, producing crops worth $11,927,366, as compared with 36,459 Indians who cultivated 762,126 acres, yielding a erop value of $11,037,589 the previous year, the fall of prices causing the disproportionate increase in the value of crops.
The live-stock industry of the Indians has passed through several years of severe drought, but held its own as compared with the white man's similar activities.
In the Crow Reservation, Mont., many progressive Indians will soon receive their share of the tribal herd in stock.
On the Jicarilla Reservation, N. Mex., a distribution was made during the year of the tribal sheep, which encouraged the Indians and benefited them in various ways.
Indians in many reservations are forming associations for the purpose of improving the grade of their live stock.
They are also taking greater interest in fairs conducted by themselves, as well as in county and State fairs.
Leasing and loans.
In many reservations there is more allotted agricultural land than can be properly cultivated by the able-bodied Indians.
The leasing of such land is now simplified by allowing the allottee or his heirs to lease some of this restrieted land for farming or grazing, subjeet only to the approval of the superintendent.
The consideration usually ineludes permanent improvements which are valuable to the allottee when the lease expires.
Many industrious Indians have borrowed money of the Government under what is known as the" reimbursable plan," and with such capital have made a successful start toward self-support.
The -substantial benefits and the generally satisfactory settlements with the Government have reasonably justified this policy.
Indian employment.
The year has shown encouraging activity of the Indians in gainful employment, in road and bridge building, mining, fishing, wild rice and maple sugar industries, and in many kinds of native arts and crafts.
Indian students earned many thousands of dollars as farm hands and in families as housekeepers and nurses.
The Arkansas Valley, as usual, furnished work in the beet fields to hundreds of young men, and a number of Indian skilled mechanics were sent out by automobile factories.
Five Civilized Tribes.
The year's receipts and disbursements amounted to $19,853,181.54.
Money belonging to individual Indians in the sum of $2,797,951.01 was expended for farms, buildings, live stock, equipment, and maintenance, and $6,990,738.25 credited to individual Indian aceounts.
Restrictions were removed from 135,- 960 acres, involving 1,778 applications by allotted Indians.
A Federal income tax of $514,380 was paid by 340 restricted Indians.
The drop in Mid-Continent crude oil from $3.50 to $1 per barrel materially affected the income from this souree as compared with the preceding year, but the prospeets had improved at the close of the year.
Oil and gas outside the Five Civilized Tribes and Osage Nation.
An oil well, with a flow of about 200 barrels, was developed in the Crow Reservation, Mont., which awakened considerable interest.
Oil and gas leases, covering 14,363.87 acres, are expected to diselose soon the oil and gas resources in the Blackfeet Reservation, Mont.
More than $137,000 was realized from bonus and advance royalties on oil and gas leases in the Kiowa Reservation, Okla.
Unsettled conditions in the Shoshone Reservation, Wyo., have been adjusted, resulting in the leasing of 2,400 acres within the ceded portion, which in addition to the usual rents and royalties provides for the payment of $72,000 bonus and extensive drilling operations.
Probate work in eastern Oklahoma.
The corps of probate attorneys continued their successful work in this distriet and were the means of preventing much wasteful extravagance and incompetence by their supervision of probate cases by checking bonds of guardians, requiring new bonds, and preventing losses to dependent Indian estates worth millions of dollars.
Osage oil and gas leases.
Rapid development continued during the year, notwithstanding unfavorable conditions.
Two sales of oil and gas leases, covering nearly 62,000 acres, were made for a bonus consideration of over $8,500,000.
The discovery of the Burbank Pool on the west side greatly stimulated activities there.
The year's oil production amounted to 20,625,127.40 barrels, and the income on royalties and bonuses for that period was $15,166,297.01.
Under existing law the State of Oklahoma is authorized to levy and collect a gross production tax on all oil produced in Osage County.
Irrigation.
The money spent for irrigation in the Indian country has been a wise investment, showing instances where lands thus reclaimed have been enhanced in value from $400 to $500 per acre.
The gross value of erops raised within the year on irrigated lands of the Yakima Reservation, Wash., exceeded $11,000,000.
Successful work was done on the construction of a diversion dam to obtain water from the Gila River preparatory to irrigating 35,000 acres in the Gila Reservation, Ariz.
Work on a like dam across the Big Horn River, Crow Reservation, Mont., was also pushed vigorously to the saving of crops worth approximately $750,000.
During the year many wells were driven, which have added considerable area to the grazing ranges.
Forestry.
A pronounced weakening in the demand for timber products shortened sales and suspended shipments during portions of the year, although there were satisfactory exceptions.
Special attention has been given to a study of lumber production costs, with good progress in obtaining complete data for use in stumpage appraisals and price readjustments.
The acute forest-fire situation required special activity of the forestry personnel last year.
On the whole, the steady expansion in timber sales on the reservations in recent years has yielded an income that has greatly advanced the Indians in self-supporting enterprises.
Indian elaims.
Under the recent legislation permitting certain Indian tribes to take elaims against the Government to the Court of Claims for adjudication no such claims have been presented, but considerable work has been done in obtaining evidence on behalf of the Indians, and upon completion of contracts with attorneys these matters will be expedited.
Probating estates of deceased Indians and approval of wills.
Final disposition was made of 3,889 heirship cases and 308 wills, 69 reopened cases, 10 cases in which former decisions were affirmed, and 82 modifications of former findings.
Eighteen claims against estates of deceased Indians were allowed, and 3,564 miscellaneous cases were handled.
The fees charged where an estate is valued at $250 or over were sufficient to reimburse the Government for nearly the entire appropriation made for probate work during the year.
Allotments.
Allotment work on 14 reservations in progress and largely completed during the year covered more than 7,000 allotments, including 417 on the public domain and nearly a million acres of land.
Removal of restrictions and land sales.
There were issued to competent Indians 1,692 patents in fee, and sales were approved to purchasers of Indian lands covering approximately 136,000 acres in which patents were to be issued.
Certificates of competency were issued for 451 tracts, containing 128,350 acres.
The policy of issuing patents in fee to Indians of one-half or less Indian blood without further proof of competency was discontinued.
It will be the purpose to test as far as possible the applicant for a patent in fee by actual accomplishments on his land or in some productive occupation before recognizing his competency, and according to the same principle to encourage the thrifty, successful Indian of whatever degree of blood to accept full title to his property with all the rights and obligations of complete citizenship.
Purchase and transportation of supplies.
High prices prevailing early in the year became much lower in the closing months on many articles.
Purchase of the regular list of supplies was made in the spring of 1920, but was deferred for later action on many important articles at a saving of approximately $90,000 on sugar, $9,750 on linseed oil, $13,000 on shoes, and $4,000 on sole and harness leather.
Considerable saving was also made by purchasing from the surplus of other departments, particularly the War and Navy Departments, and the United States Shipping Board.
Library.
Special attention was given during the year to indexing and systematizing the Indian Office library of 3,000 volumes so as to make more readily accessible to the clerks and the public information upon a wide range of subjects.
The bureau's workers.
The office and field employees in the Indian Service are now fewer than for some years past, and in view of the great need of economy in publie expenditures the number will not be allowed to exceed imperative demands.
Their average annual salary of but little over $800 strongly suggests an interest in their work of more than money value.
Twenty-nine employees were retired under the act of May 22, 1920.
Of those who had reached retirement age, 32 were retained under the provisions of section 6 of the law.
Suppression of the liquor traffie.
The protection of the Indians from intoxicants is largely a problem distinct from national prohibition and needs the direct attention given by this service to the fullest extent practicable under the appropriations which are now considerably reduced.
Prosecutions are principally necessarv aoainst.
Miscellaneous matters.
Under authority of recent legislation final rolls are in process of preparation or have been approved in 13 reservations, which will result in the distribution of tribal funds.
Competent Indians will receive without restriction their full shares, and the shares of incompetents and minors will be placed to the credit of their respective accounts.
Crop failures, high prices, and other unusual financial conditions caused a decided increase in the disbursement of individual moneys, which on the whole the Indians applied to good advantage.
Due to the great demand for money by banks, better interest rates were procured on Indian funds than during any previous period, the average rate being 5 per cent.
The land titles of the Pueblos are receiving attention through cooperation with the office of the United States Attorney General, which promises to secure justice to the Indians as well as the settlers accused of trespassing upon the rights of the former.
Prospects are encouraging for realizing valuable returns to the Indians from metalliferous minerals, which under amended legislation now include magnesite, gypsum, limestone, and asbestos.
A rich silver mine has been discovered in the San Juan Reservation, N. Mex., and a number of good copper prospects in other reservations, besides promising asbestos deposits in the San Carlos and Fort Apache Reservations, Ariz.
Indian scouts and their widows are given every assistance by this bureau in the preparation of their claims under the pension act of March 4, 1917.
Number of pensioners.
There were on the roll at the end of the fiscal year 566,053, a net loss of 26,137 from the total of 592,190 on the roll at the beginning of the year.
The number of Civil War soldiers on the roll June 30, 1920, was 243,520, and on June 30, 1921, 218,775, showing a decrease of 24,745.
The number of deaths of Civil War soldiers in 1921 was 24,775, as against 27,871 in 1920.
The number of Civil War widows, minor children, and dependents on the roll June 30, 1920, was 290,209, and on June 30, 1921, 281,327, showing a decrease of 8,882.
The deaths of widows, minor children, and dependents in 1921 numbered 20,338, as against 21,752 in 1920.
The highest number of Civil War soldiers on the roll was in 1898, when there were 745,822.
The highest number of Civil War widows on the roll was in 1912, when there were 304,373.
Of the War of 1812, there were surviving on June 30, 1921, 64 widows.
Of the War with Mexico, there were on the roll June 30, 1921, 109 survivors and 2,135 widows.
Of the Indian wars from 1817 to 1891, there were on the roll June 30, 1921, 3,784 survivors and 2,569 widows.
Of the War with Spain, there were on the roll under the provisions of the general laws 19,370 soldiers and 3,471 widows, minor children, and dependents; under the act of July 16, 1918, 4,745 widows and minor children; and under the act of June 5, 1920, 11,696 soldiers, a total of 39,282 War with Spain pensioners.
By classes the roll showed on June 30, 1921, 267,629 soldiers, 290,955 widows, 2,163 minor children, 919 helpless children, 4,285 dependents, and 102 nurses.
The names of 365 persons were on June 30, 1921, on“the Army and Navy medal of honor roll" under the act of April 27, 1916, and in receipt of the special pension of $10 per month for life allowed under said act.
Unexpended balances of appropriations.
Disbursements for pensions.
The amount disbursed in the payment of pensions for the year was $258,715,842, as against $213,295,- 314 for the preceding year.
The amount appropriated for the payment of pensions for the fiscal year 1921 was $279,000,000, as against $215,000,000 for the preceding year.
The number of pensioners residing in foreign countries in 1921 was 3,233, and the amount paid to these pensioners was $1,342,022.
Certificates issued and applications fled.
During the fiscal year there were issued on admitted claims 53,272 pension certificates; reissues in lieu of lost certificates, 1,291; accrued pension orders, 9,478: reimbursement orders, 3.328.
The amounts allowed as reimbursement for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners in 1921 were $265,442.55.
There were received and classified in the Law Division during the vear 117,872 applications of all kinds, of which 54,281 were under the act of May 1, 1920, and 45,774 under the act of June 5, 1920.
Division of pension.
Under the act of March 3, 1899, providing for division of pension of resident pensioners of the United States who have deserted their wives or children, or who are inmates of soldiers' or sailors' homes, 198 cases were acted upon in 1921, leaving 77 pending at the close of the year.
During the fiscal year 1921, there were handled 1,007,221 pieces of incoming mail, as against 662,555 pieces in 1920, and 3,862,090 pieces of outgoing mail, as against 3,240,668 pieces in 1920.
There were received in 1921 for addresses of pensioners, photographic copies of papers, etc., in fees prescribed by act of August 24, 1912, $7,432.46; as refundments to pension appropriations, $5,951.30; and as miscellaneous receipts, $2,219.52.
The amount of fees certified to attorneys in 1921 was $172,977.
During the year pensions by special acts of Congress were granted to 1,467 individuals, 912 providing for original allowances and 555 for increase of pension.
Under section 2 of the act of May 1, 1920, providing $72 per month for Civil War veterans, “helpless or blind or so nearly helpless or blind as to require regular personal aid and attendance," 38,938 veterans filed claims during the fiscal year and 34,909 claims for said rate were allowed.
Under the decision of the department in the Graham case, rendered April 25, 1921, the practice of the bureau was so modified as to expedite the settlement of the claims of these helpless veterans, obviate the ordering of medical examinations in many cases, and make the rate begin from date of filing application, when requisite condition was shown by evidence to then exist.
Proof of marriage.
Under the act of August 7, 1882, marriage must be proven in pension cases according to the law of the place where the parties resided at the time of marriage or at the time when right to pension accrued.
As the laws concerning marriage are not the same in all States and as some of the States indulge in presumptions not permitted in others, the bureau finds it necessary in many cases to deny claimants the status of legal widows of the persons on whose services claims for pension were based, although the equities appear to be in favor of the claimants.
Moreover, recent legislation in behalf of World War veterans permits the indulgence of presumption of marriage in certain cases and under certain conditions.
Remedial legislation is suggested that would permit the bureau to admit evidence to prove marriages for pensionable purposes by a standard which would be uniform throughout the entire jurisdiction of the United States.
Continuous cohabitation.
Under the act of March 3, 1899, a widow who did not marry the soldier prior to the date of the act, or prior to or during his service, has not title to pension unless it be shown that she lived and cohabited with him continuously from the date of marriage to the date of his death.
This provision works manifest injustice to worthy claimants and pension must ofttimes be denied to certain widows, although the equities appear to be in their favor.
If a soldier deserts his wife, whom he married after March 3, 1899, this willful desertion operates to defeat her title to pension as his widow, no matter how blameless or innocent she may be.
On the other hand, should the wife of a soldier, with whom marriage oceurred prior to March 3, 1899, desert him, such desertion would not defeat her title to pension as his widow, not even though she abandoned him absolutely and married and lived with another man.
This subsequent marriage was illegal, as she had a living husband from whom not divorced, and upon his death she became his legal widow.
It is suggested that this provision of the act of March 3, 1899, be repealed and in lieu thereof it be provided that a pensionable status as widow be denied the wife of a soldier who willfully and permanently abandons or deserts him without just eause or who, during his lifetime, is married to another man.
Aet of May 1, 1920.—The benefits of the prior service acts of February 6, 1907, and May 11, 1912, were extended to persons entitled to pension under acts of June 27, 1890, February 15, 1895, the joint resolutions of July 1, 1902, and June 28, 1906, and the acts of January 29, 1887, Mareh 3, 1891, and February 17, 1897.
By not having incorporated therein language similar in terms, the act of May 1, 1920, does not include all those persons on whom Congress has heretofore conferred a pensionable status for Mexican and Civil War services.
This omission gives rise to a certain amount of misunderstanding and complaint in that some heretofore provided for are not included in this latest service law.
This could be remedied by adding to the act of May 1, 1920, a section identical with section 4 of the act of May 11, 1912, and this I recommend.
A comparative cost report.
Compilation of the expenses to the Government for the adjudication of pension claims and for the payment of pension in 1920 and 1921 shows that in 1920, 76,996 claims were disposed of at a cost for salaries and other expenses of administration of $1,193,068, or $15.50 per claim disposed of; for 1921, 91,515 claims were disposed of at a cost of $1,578,954, or $17.25 per claim.
In 1920 $213,295,315 were disbursed for pensions at a cost of $318,816, or 15 cents for every $100 disbursed; in 1921 $258,715,843 were paid out at a cost of $265,480, or 101 cents for every $100 disbursed.
For the last three months of the fiscal year 1920, 15,048 claims were disposed of at a cost for adjudication work of $298,267, or $19.82 per claim, and $53,319,540 paid out in pensions at a cost of $79,704, or 15 cents for every $100 disbursed.
For the last three months of 1921, 30,322 claims were disposed of at a cost of $394,738, or $13.02 per claim, and $64,166,162 were disbursed at a cost of $66,370, or 101 cents for every $100 paid out.
While in any cost report cognizance must be taken of varying conditions that affect the results shown, yet it is gratifying to note a decrease in cost per claim adjudicated and in cost of disbursements in the first three months of the present administration, due largely to changes and readjustments made with a view to an increase of efficiency in service.
Retirement of employees under the act of May 22, 1920.—The work of the bureau in administering the act of May 22, 1920, for the retirement of emplovees of the classified civil service, is progressing satisfactorily.
The entire work of adjudication of elaims under this act is centralized in the Retirement Division and performed by 32 emplovees.
Up to June 30, 1921, 7,367 claims for annuity had been filed.
6.463 being for age and 904 on account of disability.
At the close of the fiscal vear there were on the roll 6,471 annuitants, of whom 6,066 are men and 405 women.
For the fiscal vear ending June 30, 1921, $12,513,636.69, deducted from appropriations for salaries of employees to whom the retirement act applies, had been transferred to the “civil-service retirement and disability fund," and this amount was increased by interests, profits, and miscellaneous items to the amount of $72,752.68.
The disbursements on account of annuities, refunds, and allowances were $2,913,547.34, leaving a surplus in the fund of $9,672,842.03.
During the year refundments to amount of $322,964.07 were made to persons who had become separated from the classified civil service.
The appropriations for expenses of administration amounted to $52,350.32; expenditures were $51,023.52; unexpended balance, $1,326.80.
During the vear 33,913 claims were disposed of at a cost of $51,023.52, or $1.50 per claim disposed of, and $2,913,547.34 disbursed for annuities, refunds, and allowañces at a cost of 60 cents for every $100 paid out.
In conformity with the provisions of seetion 16 of the retirement act, George B. Buck, of New York; Dr. James D. Maddrill, of Philadelphia; and Joseph S. McCoy, Government actuary, were selected to make an actuarial report upon the operations of the act for the fiscal vear ending June 30, 1921, and to recommend changes deemed necessary to protect public interests and maintain the retirement system on a sound financial basis.
The findings and recommendations of this board of actuaries will be submitted to Congress.
Work in arrears.
Attention is called to present conditions in the Pension Bureau, to which a great influx of claims has come as the result of recent legislation granting pensions and increase of pensions to veterans of the Civil War and the War with Spain and providing annuities for retired emplovees in the classified civil service and refunds to those separated from the service of moneys deducted from the salaries for the retirement fund.
The work of the bureau has practically doubled in the past year; the force to cope with this work, instead of being increased to meet the added demands, has been reduced.
As a result, the work of the bureau is greatly in arrears, and this condition is a source of much complaint, dissatisfaction, and criticism of the bureau, that in turn reflects upon the administration at large.
The work of the bureau in its administration of the pension laws and the retirement system should be made current.
This will necessitate the employment of a temporary force for some months.
Once it is made current it can be kept current by the present permanent force.
The remedy lies with Congress.
The receipt of applications has reached proportions far in excess of the capacity of the office to provide performance.
The total number of applications filed jumped from 75,657 in the fiscal year 1919 to 107,656 in the fiscal year just closed, an increase of 43 per cent in two years.
In view of this increase of receipts, and in consequence of the present fixed organization and rate of separation of the technical personnel, the work has fallen in arrears and the quality of the output suffered in character.
On June 30, 1919, the number of applications for patents awaiting action amounted to 17,735; on June 30, 1921, that number jumped to 49,334, creating a condition unprecedented in the history of the office.
The average new case is now reached for first action in about 7 or 8 months, the normal period being 1 month.
Legislation is now pending in Congress which, if effected, will bring the condition back to normal.
The number of patents granted and trade-marks, prints, and labels registered was 53,817, an increase of 6,408 over the preceding fiscal year and 10,464 over the fiscal year 1919.
The receipts of money for the year were $2,712,119.69, being an increase of $96,422.36 over the preceding fiscal year and $598,769.52 over the fiscal year 1919.
The net surplus for the fiscal year was $71,745.73, making a total of profit to the Government out of the Patent Office to date of $8,376,- 769.29.
Appointment of commissioner.
On June 2, 1921, Dr. John James Tigert, professor of psychology in the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Ky., was appointed Commissioner of Education, vice P. P. Claxton, resigned.
Reorganization.
Under the new Commissioner of Education a reorganization of the administration of the bureau has been effected.
Briefly stated, the functions of the bureau are as follows: (1) To be informed upon all subjects pertaining to education, (2) to disseminate such information, and (3) to promote the cause of education generally.