Washington, D. C., November 15, 1922.
Sır: I herewith submit for your consideration my second annual report of the operations of the Department of the Interior, together with the report of the bureaus, offices, institutions, and Territories under its supervision.
In last year's report, after giving a brief history of the Interior or"Home" Department and its extensive and varied activities, I gave an estimate or summarization of the land, water, and mineral resources of the public domain and Indian reservations.
These constitute the "raw materials" with which the Interior Department performs its construetive development work, and, as will be seen from what follows in this report, substantial and definite progress has been made during the past year.
In the unsettled, and at times difficult, situations which have confronted the country as a result of the late war, the use and development of the resources under the control of this department have contributed in no small measure to the stabilization of conditions and renewal of prosperity in the United States.
These contributions have included opportunities for home making upon the publie lands by returned soldiers and other citizens, the discovery of new oil fields, development of existing fields, and increased production of oil and its by-products, the prospecting for coal, and the opening of many mines in the Western States.
Incidentally, these developments have resulted in a very substantial cash return to the Treasury of the United States and to the various States in which mineral resources have been developed under the leasing law.
On the more directly human or welfare side, valuable work has been carried on by the department, and distinct advance has been made in the adjustment and payment of pensions to veterans of the various wars and their widows, in education, in mine safety and rescue work, in instruction and physical welfare work among the Indians and Eskimos, and the care of the sick and insane in hospitals, notable for their humane and successful methods.
In my last report I mentioned the fact that the admínistration of the General Land Office had not been in the past as satisfactory as it might have been, there being apparently too much delay in acting upon homestead and other claims and the issuance of patents therefor, and I further stated that as a result of the application of improved methods and of the efficiency of the employees a considerable increase in the output of work had taken place.
I am now able to report that the examination of final homestead proofs is current and some of the clerks engaged on that work have been assigned to other lines temporarily.
This action has already resulted in placing in the hands of the people assets valued at more than $30,000,000, which amount has been added to the taxable property of the West.
Material progress has also been made in the adjustment of State and railroad grants and in disposing of the other classes of cases before that office.
This has been done without any increase in force and notwithstanding the fact that the number of cases received for action appears to be increasing rather than decreasing.
For example, in October, 1921, 36,964 cases were received in the General Land Office, while in October of this year 38,148 cases were received.
During October, 1921, 35,802 cases were disposed of, while during October of this year 43,767 cases were disposed of.
One result of the prompt disposition of the work is the lessening of miscellaneous correspondence asking for the status of cases and urging action thereon.
The number of such letters received during October of this year was nearly 5,000 less than in October of 1921.
Work has continued throughout the year on reclamation projects theretofore undertaken, and one new project was begun in Oregon.
The work was necessarily restricted because of lack of funds, but the irrigable acreage, as well as the area upon which crops were planted and grown, showed an increase over the past year.
The total estimated value of crops raised on reclamation projects proper is about $475,000,000.
The results achieved justify the continuation and extension of the reclamation policy, and favorable opportunities exist awaiting only money and authorization.
I referred to the Colorado River project in my last report.
Investigations on that project have been carried on during the past year, and legislation proposing to authorize the undertaking is pending before Congress.
Another possibility which has had preliminary investigation by this department during the past year is known as the Columbia Basin project, which would involve the irrigation of more than 1,500,000 acres of land in the valley of the Columbia River.
A bill authorizing further investigation of this project is also pending.
I adhere to the opinion expressed last year that an affirmative policy looking to the completion of existing, and the undertaking of new, reclamation projects should be followed.
The benefits in the way of making of homes, increase in food production, and addition to the national wealth by the reclamation of lands otherwise practically worthless are illustrated by the results already accomplished on existing projects.
The incidental benefits following such development, ineluding employment of labor, furnishing markets for supplies and equipment, building of rail and wagon roads, creation and growth of towns and cities, furnish an almost equally strong justification for the undertaking.
Reclamation from the human standpoint.
The settlers on the reclamation projects, in common with farmers throughout the country, have been passing through a period of financial stress due largely to the deflation in prices of live stock and agricultural products.
While this condition as yet has not resulted in a serious falling off in repayments, it has emphasized the need of a more sympathetic and intelligent understanding on the part of the department of the problems of our farmers and a larger measure of helpful cooperation in their solution.
In the past the relation between the department and the settlers has been that of debtor and creditor, with not enough appreciation of the fact that the continuance of a national policy of reclamation depends in a large measure upon the success of the latter.
In order to establish more cordial relations and to bring about a mutuality of interest and effort, a survey of the economic conditions on our projects has been initiated by me and is being supplemented by an inventory by the Census Bureau of the indebtedness of the farmers.
Upon the ascertainment of these facts it is proposed to correlate the various agencies at our command in stimulating better methods of farming and marketing, in subdivision and settlement of excess and unused lands, and in improving the credit of the industrious and worthy farmers.
The increase in tenantry, while not wholly an evil, is sufficiently great to warrant our careful consideration.
The cultivation of large areas in unprofitable crops, and other agricultural practices which experience has demonstrated are unsuited to the region, are too common to be ignored.
Without lessening in any degree the self-reliance and initiative of the settlers or assuming a paternal attitude in dealing with their problems, the department can render useful service along lines which will promote greatly the general welfare and prosperity of the project communities.
The program for the Indians includes improvement of health conditions, better living, extension of practical education, and encouragement of agriculture.
A definite program covering a series of years has been planned which will better permit accomplishment than can be obtained by a year-to-year plan.
The attendance of Indians at schools for the past year was 3,000 greater than ever before, and in this connection the enrollment of Indian children in public schools, lightening the Government's expense for their education and bringing the Indian families in closer relation with the general community life has been encouraged.
The health of the Indians needs and requires closer attention and the Indians were never so receptive along this line as they are at present.
A special effort to provide health facilities, including hospitals and the service of skilled nurses, has been made, and arrangements perfected for the cooperation of the American Red Cross in this work.
Not the least important feature of the work of the past year was an industrial campaign among the Indians, during which superintendents, accompanied by a service farmer, field matron, and physician.
This work has already borne fruit in the development of better crops, gardens, and homes and new interest among the Indians in these important matters.
On March 4.
1921, there were pending for consideration over 99,000 applications for pension, and the force of the Pension Office was apparently able only to keep pace with the allowance of current claims and unable to reduce the accumulated applications.
I thereupon recommended and Congress authorized a small temporary force, which became available in the latter part of the fiscal year 1922.
In addition, various reforms were made in the office in the method of handling business, and a spirit of efficiency awakened in the employees, with the result that 130,736 pension claims were disposed of during the year, 64,967 pension certificates, 1,340 reissues, 1,011 accrued pension orders, and 5,873 reimbursement orders issued.
The total number of pensioners on the roll at the end of the fiscal year was 547.016, being 19,037 less than the number at the beginning of the vear.
The amount disbursed in the payment of pensions for the vear was $253,807,583.
The claims were disposed of at a cost for salaries and other expenses of $12.01 per claim, as compared with the cost in 1921 of $17.33 per claim.
The cost of paying pensions already allowed was reduced from 11.4 cents per payment to 10 cents per payment in 1922.
This decrease in the cost of adjudication and payment was due principally to changes and readjustments made since March 4, 1921, increasing efficiency in the service.
Congress during the year enacted a law providing that after September 4, 1922, pensions should be payable monthly instead of quarterly, as heretofore.
This involves the mailing monthly of approximately 600,000 checks, as against 200,000 under the quarterly payment plan.
Congress has provided the necessary force and equipment to take care of this increase in work.
Due to the enactment of more liberal pension laws and also to more liberal construction of existing laws there has been an increase in the work of the Pension Office, and during the past year over 350,000 more pieces of incoming mail were received than in the preceding one, with, of course, a corresponding increase in the outgoing.
The civil service' retirement act is also administered through the Pension Bureau, and I am advised that the work of that division is practically current.
There was $6,392,327 disbursed during the year, leaving a surplus in the fund on June 30, 1922, of $18,134,263.
Attention is directed to the recommendation of the Commissioner of Pensions that compulsory retirement should become operative at an earlier date than fixed by the present law, viz, that retention beyond the age of 65 years should be by mutual agreement between the employee and the head of the department, and that no employee be continued in the service after reaching the age of 70 years.
It is interesting to note the enormous increase in the number of applications for patents, trade-marks, and designs since the close of the World War.
The number of applications received in 1920 exceeded by more than 25,000 those of the previous year.
In 1921 there was a further increase, and last year the number of applications received amounted to 113,597, breaking all previous records.
Fortunately, Congress had granted some relief near the close of the fiscal year by increasing salaries of the technical corps and providing for a small increase in force.
In addition, radical changes have been made in the method of handling business, which helped materially in coping with the enormous volume of business before the Patent Office.
Nevertheless, it was entirely impossible with the available force and facilities on hand to keep pace with the increased volume of applications.
I have therefore recommended a further small increase in force of the Patent Office, and if the increase in the work of that office continues in the ratio of he past three years it may be necessary to further augment the force and facilities.
It should be pointed out, however, in this connection that the Patent Office is a self-supporting institution and annually turns into the Treasury an amount exceeding its total expenses.
Last year the total expenses of the Patent Office were $2,722,205, while the receipts were $2,894,286, leaving a surplus of $172,081.
These national“playgrounds" wherein are found unparalleled opportunities for recreation, in areas where curiosities, forests, and beautiful scenery are preserved in their natural condition, continue to grow in popularity.
During the past year the visitors numbered 1,216,490, a substantial increase over the phenomenal one of the year before.
Approximately 40 per cent of the visitors came by train, the remainder in their own automobiles.
The policy of providing suitable free camp grounds, with running water and sanitary facilities, has been continued and must be maintained in order to accommodate the increased volume of travel.
The large amount of travel by automobile has entailed additional labor in maintaining the park roads, but great efficiency has been displayed in this work by the superintendents and their assistants.
People from every State and Territory visit and take a personal pride in our national parks, and I am glad to say that during the past year fewer complaints and more compliments have been received from visitors than heretofore.
Many beautiful or interesting portions of these parks are yet inaccessible to the visitor because of lack of roads, and during the past year I have had worked out a comprehensive system or plan for additional roads or extensions of existing roads in the parks.
Because of the importance of economy in expenditures, I have not urged a large appropriation for this purpose this year, but am of opinion that the program should be undertaken in the near future and a substantial annual appropriation made for several years until the system can be completed.
It will be justified not only by the increased comfort and pleasure of visitors to the parks but by the increased revenues derived therefrom.
The work of the Geological Survey has assumed additional importance since the enactment of the general leasing law, covering coal, oil, and other minerals.
Geological work is availed of extensively by would-be prospectors and developers of the mineral resources of the United States and the land-classification work by this department and its various bureaus in the handling and disposition of the lands and minerals under the various laws.
The work of the survey is preliminary to the issuance of the patent or lease, while that of the Bureau of Mines begins thereafter.
Topographic surveys play an important part not only in the constructive work of this department but in the road-building program now under way, as well as developments of all sorts, wherein accurate and definite knowledge of topography is necessary.
It would be distinctly advantageous if larger appropriations for carrying on the latter work should be made available.
Investigations of the water and mineral resources of the United States and of Alaska continued during the past year, adding to the stock of information already secured through this source and available for the use of the Government or its citizens in the development of these natural resources.
With a reduced force the collection of statistics of mineral production continued, in cooperation with the Bureau of the Census and various States, and weekly and monthly mimeographed reports have issued on fuels and cement during the year.
Reorganization of the bureau has been effected by the commissioner, with beneficial results, and during the past year a number of educational surveys have been made at the request of various States and cities.
A new division of Physical Education and School Hygiene has been established, a change amply warranted by the importance of the work.
In Alaska 70 schools for natives were in operation with an enrollment of approximately 4,000.
In addition to the care of the physical and mental welfare of the Alaskan natives, the bureau has charge of the important reindeer industry, in which notable gain was made during the year.
The work of the Bureau of Mines has been increased notably within the year as a result particularly of the increase in production of petroleum and natural gas from the public lands and the large number of permits and leases issued under the various leasing acts.
In the administration of these laws the larger part of the continuing work must fall upon this bureau, since it is of the utmost importance that the wells and mines be opened and operated according to the best technical practice if that safe and efficient conduct of the business contemplated by the law is to be realized.
In the report of the director of the bureau will be found details as to present operations.
I purpose here to discuss rather certain changes which, in my judgment, should be made in order to protect the public interest and secure the best results.
The service is now dependent exclusively upon specifie appropriations made upon the basis of estimates compiled long in advance of the spending period and necessarily and properly restricted in many ways.
New fields come in with a rush and it is impossible to foresee when or to forecast how large a technical force will be necessary in order to handle the work in such fields.
If the Government is not prepared to measure and receive its share of the mineral as produced, it is in the position of an absentee landlord who accepts the tenant's unchecked statement as to amount of returns, repairs, and renewals.
In mines and oil wells too careless or hurried work may do irreparable damage to a property, and to save the publie interest it is necessary to have expert engineers available at all times to go to any lease and make sure that the terms of the law as regarding safety and conservation of the mineral are not being overlooked under the stress of operating for production.
In a new oil field things move rapidly and there are long-established traditions which permit waste unless there is careful supervision.
At the same time, it is a highly technical industry into which new men of limited knowledge are constantly entering or men of experience in some local field are facing unknown conditions in a new region.
It is peculiarly an industry where joint action is necessary to prevent encroachment of water in the sand, waste of gas, or other harmful practices, and the Government as lessor of the land through the Bureau of Mines furnishes the agency for effecting this cooperation.
In the case of the coal mines there is the further impelling fact that unsafe practices may lead readily to disaster with loss of life and severe damage to the property.
The mines operated on lands belonging to the people as a whole should set an example in these particulars and to accomplish this an adequate staff is imperative.
Other phases of the matter are of scarcely less importance.
As it now stands a well running wild on Government land, on any abandoned lease, and which may constitute a real source of loss and damage, can not be controlled by the Government because of lack of any appropriation for such work, and a fire burning in a coal bed on the public lands can not be extinguished if the expense is more than a nominal sum.
Furthermore, under the terms of the leases granted, lessees are only required to store royalty oil for 30 days.
It follows that the Government is forced to sell its oil currently regardless of price, and as a practical matter this shuts it out from participation in the business of selling to the smaller refineries which are usually able and willing to pay a premium price.
In a number of fields, if the Government will provide itself with some reasonable amount of storage capacity, such as other producers handling equivalent amounts of oil have, it will be able to secure appreciably better purchase contracts.
It will also be possible for the department to withhold the royalty oils from the market in periods of especially low price, selling them later when there is greater demand and a much better price.
Under the system necessarily followed up to the present, Government royalty oils serve to help beat down the price in periods of depression to the injury of the consumer.
To the extent that the Government is obliged to take part in business it should rather throw its influences toward stabilization rather than demoralization of the industry.
Fortunately in this case if funds were available it is possible to do so and at the same time increase the public service.
The royalty oils now handled by this department from public lands and naval reserves amount to approximately 17,000 barrels per day.
From the Indian lands as much more is being produced, and from both sources a rapid increase is to be anticipated.
Estimated on the basis of returns for May, 1922, the return to the Government is now running $7,800,000 per year for oil and gas, while in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1920, the Indians received $22,- 500,000 from these sources.
In the years to come with more extensive development of the public estate these revenues will become increasingly important, and at this time every effort should be made to establish the work on a sound business basis.
Accordingly I have recommended that 10 per cent of the money paid into the Treasury on account of sales, bonuses, royalties, and rentals, under the leasing acts of February 25, 1920, and October 2, 1917, shall be set aside as an oil and mineral administration fund, from which, in addition to specific appropriations provided in regular appropriation acts, the Secretary shall be authorized, through the Bureau of Mines or otherwise, to pay the expense of administration and supervision over permits and leases, including the expense of the collection of royalties in cash or kind and the expense of the construction of necessary storage for oil and the storing of the same until it can be most advantageously disposed of.
If this change in the law be made, it will open the way to an economical and efficient administration of the public estate.
The necessity, at least temporarily, for continuing direct appropriations arises from the need of providing for research and experimental work aside from supervision and administration.
Since the results of the experiments are equally available to the industry and the Government, it is proper that they should be paid for out of general funds.
The returns, too, from leases on Indian lands and from leases in Alaska are already allocated by law to especial purposes, so Congress should be free to supplement the proposed administration fund by direct appropriation at such times and to such extent as circumstances may justify.
There is now before Congress for consideration a bill placing on this department full responsibility for production and conservation of helium, that priceless balloon gas of which the United States has the only known large supply.
The proposed law has been carefully drawn after thorough consideration of the War, Navy, and Interior Departments, and has received your approval.
It is in the public interest, and I trust it will become a law.
It is the natural and logical next step in the program of securing to our defense forces and for commercial aerial transportation a supply of noninflammable gas for inflation of the ships.
Within the year the Bureau of Mines, in connection with the helium board, has made notable progress in perfecting methods of separating helium from natural gas, and money and means should be provided for erecting such plants as will economically carry out the processes about to be developed.
The report of the Governor of Alaska makes recommendations for the improvement of conditions in that Territory which merit consideration.
There can be no doubt that steps should be taken which will render it possible to utilize more of the latent and undeveloped resources of that country, and the Government is especially interested in such developments, because of its investment in the Alaskan Railroad, extending from Seward to Fairbanks in the interior.
The road which, when completed, will involve an investment of approximately $56,000,000, is not at present self-supporting, and appropriations are made annually to meet those maintenance and operations costs which exceed revenues.
On completion of the 700-foot steel bridge over the Tanana River and the conversion of about 56 miles of line from narrow to broad gauge, the construction work on the road proper will have been finished.
This work is under way, and in the near future freight and passenger traffic can be carried from the Pacific coast to the interior terminal without transfer or delay.
Already the revenues of the road are showing improvement, there having been an increase of approximately $100,000 in the revenues of 1922 over those of 1921, and a still greater increase is estimated for the year 1923.
This is accomplished notwithstanding the freight rates to the interior are materially less than were the rates on similar freight to the same interior points via other routes.
To properly utilize the railroad, however, and to procure additional traffic, there must be secured the development of coal and other mineral areas tributary to the railroad, as well as utilization of the agricultural and grazing resources.
Roads, trails, and other means of transportation to and from the railroad line are essential.
No oil is yet produced in Alaska, except limited quantities in the Katalla field, but preparations for drilling on the Alaska Peninsula are actively under way and during the coming year should determine the existence or nonexistence of valuable oil deposits in that particular area.
The governor estimates the number of reindeer in Alaska at 250.000.
Steps have been taken during the past year to transplant a small reindeer herd to Kodiak Island, where it is believed large herds can be supported, and altogether the reindeer industry promises to be a very important factor not only in the welfare of the natives who, as the game supply diminishes, must depend quite largely on this source of supply for food and clothing but as a partial source of meat supply for the general public.
Activity with respect to the exploration for and production of the oil, gas, and coal deposits of the public domain continued throughout the year.
Cash receipts from naval petroleum reserves deposited in the Treasury amounted to $2,425,324, while the receipts for oil and gas royalties from the unreserved public lands amounted to $6,374,143.
Three new fields were discovered during the past year—one in northern Montana, one in southern Utah, and one in the northwestern part of New Mexico, in the Navajo Indian Reservation.
As yet, there has not been sufficient drilling to determine their extent or probable oil content.
Receipts from permits and leases for these minerals on the public domain are divided among the reclamation fund, the State in which the mineral is produced, and the Treasury, and I regard myself as a trustee for these three interests, charged with the duty of obtaining as large a return as conditions warrant.
The principal fields of Wyoming and Montana have, by reason of their isolation, lack of pipe and other transportation lines and refineries, not yielded either the quantity of oil or the price per barrel which they should.
With the view of remedying this condition, I have, under the authority of the leasing law, advertised for bids for the Government royalty oil in those fields.
Next to the interest in oil and gas was the activity with respect to the coal deposits of the public domain.
During the year prospecting permits covering 210,400 acres were issued and 24 leases granted, covering 11,248 acres.
In the coal shortage of the past year, mines opened on Government lands contributed materially to augment the local supply and relieve distress in the vicinity.
One of the bureaus now of this department was organized in 1812, another in 1832, and the salary schedule established for employees has not been revised since that time.
The only increase in compensation accorded has been the temporary one of $240 per annum, within certain limits.
As is well known, the scale of wages and salaries in the business world has advanced many times during the past 50 years and particularly during the last decade.
Some of the newer commissions and offices of the Government have been accorded a salary scale more in accord with the present-day conditions.
This situation leads to an inevitable loss and turnover to those departments and bureaus operating under thé old pay scale.
Scientists, attorneys, and experts receive offers from private concerns far exceeding the amount they receive or can hope to receive in the service and naturally resign.
Employees in the bureaus with low scales of wages, knowing of the higher salaries paid in other, newer, Government establishments, secure transfers to the latter with the object of bettering their condition.
The turnover thus occasioned is enormous and demoralizing.
Those who remain naturally feel that they are not being fairly treated and only stay either because of love of the work or on account of personal reasons which prevent their bettering themselves elsewhere.
The Bureau of Efficiency and committees of Congress have gathered a vast amount of information upon this subject, and measures are now pending in Congress designed to effect a reclassification of Government employees not only with the object of adjusting and bettering the pay but of accomplishing a scientific classification of positions and work.
For the good of the public service I trust that some such legislation may be speedily enacted.
The close cooperation initiated last year among the various bureaus of this department dealing directly or indirectly with the lands in the public domain and in Indian reservations, and with their resources, has continued with marked success.
It results in better knowledge as to the character of the lands and their varied resources, in increased development, elimination of waste, and better returns.
The same policy of cooperation has been pursued with respect to other departments of the Government.
It has been my effort to avail myself through such cooperation of the knowledge and facilities of other departments where they could be utilized in dealing with the Interior Department affairs.
Notable results were obtained during the past year through cooperation with the Department of Agriculture in the matter of studies and investigations of soils.
Joint commissions visited and submitted helpful suggestions with respect to the Milk River and Klamath reclamation projects, and like benefit was obtained from this method as to many other reclamation projects.
Cooperation with the Publie Health Service of the Treasury Department was had in the study of problems connected with health and sanitation in mines, water supply, sewage disposal, and sanitation in a number of the national parks; and in the Hot Springs National Park a passed assistant surgeon of the Public Health Service was detailed as superintendent, with marked beneficial results.
Cooperation with the Navy was had in the protection and handling of the naval oil reserves, with the object of obtaining therefrom for the use of the Navy, when and where needed, available supplies of fuel and other oils.
Such cooperation not only aids in the efficient and successcful performance of the work, but tends to eliminate duplication or conflict.
As intimated, the work of the department is broadly divided into (1) constructive, i.
In the latter phase of its work the department may be said to act under the laws of Congress as a disbursing officer, the payments authorized being in the nature of compensation for wounds, military service, etc., and therefore not ratable as directly productive.
The other side of the department's activity, involving such things as the building of reclamation works, the control and development of natural resources, etc., is development or constructive work and produces a substantial revenue.
In fact, eliminating consideration of the moneys disbursed under the eleemosynary or welfare side, the department's receipts exceed the appropriations made for the support of its constructive activities.
For instance, during the year 1922, out of a total appropriation of $342,897,835, $297,404,420 were moneys disbursed for pensions or carried in what is denominated permanent and indefinite appropriations," which include items like interest on Indian trust funds, payments to States for schools, public roads, etc., leaving for expenditure in furtherance of what I have denominated constructive or development work $45,493,415, whereas the cash receipts of the department for the year 1922 amounted to $48,612,528.
In other words, in that part of the department's work which may be denominated constructive the cash receipts exceeded the appropriations by more than $3,100,000..
I have endeavored to secure reasonably liberal appropriations for this line of work by showing this cash return in excess of expenditures and by further pointing out that the money so expended and the work so performed are productive of immense financial and taxable values throughout the United States, thereby increasing the wealth of the United States and the States and Territories.
An example is the work of the Reclamation Service, the total construction cost of which was, to and including the year 1921, in round numbers, $129,000,000, resulting in the production of crops to that date valued at $475,000,000, to say nothing of the enormous inerease in land values, the value of buildings, live stock, ete.
Moreover, the national benefit arising out of this work in the way of the making of homes, improvement of mental and physical welfare of the people, and the prevention of waste and similar conservation of resources is almost immeasurable.
Secretary of the Interior.
1. Entered and allowed during the fiscal year, public and Indian lands, 10,367,153 acres, a decrease of 5,264,477 acres as compared with the year previous.
3. Collected from all sources during the year an aggregate of $11,784,695.72, of which sum, after the deposit in the Treasury of the United States of the receipts for the benefit of special funds, there was turned over to the Treasury of the United States for the credit of its general fund the sum of $3,848,598.42.
4. Collected and deposited in the Treasury of the United States as the result of the work of the Field Service, $199,059.79.
6. Investigated in the field and reported upon, 17,570 cases.
7. Conducted 287 hearings in Government contests.
9. Approved and accepted surveys and restorations covering an area of 6,151892 acres?
10. Entered of record 379,396 tract book notations.
11. Patented under the homestead laws 9,632,635 acres, an increase of 1,459,833 acres over 1921.
12. Issued 8,399 patents under the stock-raising homestead law, embracing an area of 2,919,819 acres, an increase of 1,670,727 acres over last year.
13. Secured the withdrawal of 96,590 acres for stock driveways, and released from such withdrawal 101,863 acres; gross area included in such withdrawals at the end of the fiscal year, 9,010,328 acres.
14. Closed the Fairbanks townsite trust with a balance to the credit of the city of $7,200, and received final payment for 1,846 town lots in other townsites.
15. Allowed 123 cash entries under the Minnesota drainage act, covering an area of 19,680 acres; patented under this act since its passage, 1,021,920 acres.
37. Sold the timber on 3,402 acres of Oregon and California railroad land for $198,529.68; total amount of sales to date, $943,- 948.91.
38. Effected two exchanges of Oregon and California railroad lands under the act of May 31, 1918, for lands in private ownership, in which the United States received 23,669 acres in exchange for 22,270 acres.
39. Issued 6,805 Indian_trust patents for an area of 495,808 acres and 2,265 fee patents to Indians for an area of 252,560 acres.
40. Approved for patent 118 selections, aggregating 439,927 acres, in lieu of lands within Indian reservations.
42. Issued 223 coal-prospecting permits, embracing 210,404 acres, and 24 leases of coal lands, covering 11,248 acres.
44. Awarded 10 leases of oil land under section 14 of the leasing act, based on discovery, embracing 4,860 acres.
45. Issued under the relief provisions of the leasing act, 84 leases, covering 17,455 acres, and 181 prospecting permits under said provisions for 133,290 acres.
46. Issued 603 oil and gas prospecting permits in Alaska.
47. Received under the mineral-leasing act for the fiscal year, $8,799,468.17, of which $6,374,143.52 was from public lands and $2,425,324.65 from naval petroleum reserves.
50. Issued 574 mineral patents for an area of 53,043 acres.
51. Issued 5,000 more patents during the fiscal year than during the year previous, an increase of 2,787,011 acres, of which 2,459,833 acres were covered by entries under the homestead law, this class of cases being made current.
1. Conducted active supervision of all schools by visits of experienced supervisors to every unit once or oftener during the year, including, where practicable, inspection of mission and public schools attended by Indian children.
2. Secured an average attendance in Government boarding sehools of 549 more than their combined capacity and increased the average attendance in all schools 3,000 above any previous record, largely in the public schools.
3. Introduced a thoroughly revised course of study, with full academic and industrial outlines for teachers.
Adopted uniform, semiannual examinations.
Accomplished greater permanence in the teaching force and a large attendance of instructors at summer schools of methods.
4. Made_a personal survey of the Southwest, where the Indians were found to be urgently in need of additional school capacity for about 11,000 children.
5. Operated 80 hospitals, having a total bed capacity of 2,411.
Maintained a steady progress in Indian health conditions, with but few epidemics.
Arranged, without salary cost to the Government, for three trained Red Cross nurses to serve one year in cooperation with the regular health personnel in developing methods and practice for improving Indian home conditions.
6. Made satisfactory progress in general farming and important extension of experimentation, including tests with Peruvian alfalfa, Mexican June corn, Bermuda onions, dates, etc.
7. Stimulated the sheep industry among the Indians of the Southwest by introducing pure-bred rams, and increased largely the formation of stock growers' associations, now a movement of special value to reservation industries.
8. Inaugurated on the reservations a general industrial survey for improved homes and surroundings, more and better farming, and greater interest in live stock, resulting in pronounced agricultural activity in many sections, with a marked reduction of the ration list.
Will emphasize home improvement this year in all Indian school work.
9. Completed important diversion dams across the Gila River, Ariz., and Big Horn River, Mont., bringing the irrigable area up to approximately 605,000 acres on 50 Indian reservations.
Also carried forward other like construction.
10. Made allotments of land to 6,070 individual Indians on the reservations and the public domain, embracing 745,000 acres.
Issued 911 fee patents and 186 certificates of competency.
Effected sales of Indian lands for a total of $2,232,833, and expended a balance of $9,000 in the purchase of small tracts for homeless Indians in California.
11. Made a personal visit to the Chippewa agencies in Minnesota and arranged for a commission to inquire carefully into all matters about which the Chippewas complain, particularly as to compensation for land and standing timber in what is now known as the Minnesota National Forest, with a view to bringing to the attention of Congress any legislation to which these Indians are entitled.
Requested the Department of Justice to begin action in the Supreme Čourt of the United States to determine the respective rights of the Chippewas and the State of Minnesota to swamp lands in the reservations of that State.
12. Manufactured 15,000,000 feet of lumber at the Menominee mills, Wisconsin.
Made no large offerings of timber on account of depressed lumber market.
13. Conducted vigorous prosecution against bootleggers, moonshine stills, and vendors of poisonous intoxicants, and cooperated effectively with local and State suppression officers.
14. Issued a comprehensive brochure on peyote and its injurious use among the Indians, showing the need of prohibitory legislation.
15. Assisted Indian scouts in the preparation of their claims for pension, about 100 of whom were awarded pensions during the year.
16. Received for the Five Civilized Tribes $4,362,059 in individual Indian money and expended therefrom for maintenance, farms, buildings, live stock, and equipment, $2,334,220.
The year's gross oil production for these Indians was 8,181,971 barrels, and the total revenue to the restricted class from oil and gas was $3,897,619.32.
17. Brought in a 300-barrel oil well in the Ötoe field, Oklahoma; five new wells on the Shoshone Reservation, Wyo.
18. Disposed of 3,164 heirship cases, 341 wills, and earned fees exceeding four-fifths of the cost of this work.
Reduced probate districts in eastern Oklahoma from 17 to 8.
19. Made substantial savings in the purchase of Indian supplies by taking advantage of falling prices and cooperating with other Government departments.
20. Under modified regulations awarded a number of leases to applicants for renewal of mining contracts on Quapaw lead and zinc lands under special specifications that will better protect Indian owners and the mining industry.
21. Instrumental in having legislation proposed (now pending) with the view to adjusting conflicts over land titles on the Pueblo reservations in New Mexico that have been the subject of controversies for many years.
22. Investigated conflicts over grazing privileges of stockmen and Navajo Indians on the public domain near Crown Point, N. Mex., which had tended toward serious trouble and formulated definite plan for settlement.
This will include a proposed expenditure of $90,000 appropriated by Congress to buy lands for Navajoes of that locality, and confining the Indians so far as may be possible to the use of these purchased lands and to other townships to be leased for them.
23. Made extended field investigation of work of determining heirs of Indians and have matured plans for improving this branch of the service, the issuance of new regulations, and have requested Congress for an increase in heirship fees so as to place this work upon an entirely self-supporting basis.
2. Returned to the Treasury $11,340,257.07 of the amount appropriated for the payment of pensions.
3. Returned to the Treasury $10,599.70 of the sum appropriated for the maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries of special examiners.
4. Returned to the Treasury $172,836.39 of the amount appropriated for fees and expenses of examining surgeons, and $4,270.12 of the sum appropriated for per diem and expenses of special examiners.
5. Receipts for addresses, certified copies, ete.
Refundments to pension appropriations, $11,867.35.
Miscellaneous receipts, $1,620.47.
6. Received and elassified 114,251 applications for pension, of which 47,710 were under act of May 1, 1920, for Civil War service, and 39,650 under act of June 5, 1920, for Spanish War service.
7. Disposed of 130,736 pension elaims and issued 64,967 pension certificates, 1,340 reissues in lieu of lost certificates, 10,011 accrued pension orders, and 5,873 reimbursement orders, on which $488,248.28 were allowed as reimbursement for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners.
8. Under act of May 22, 1920, for retirement of employees of the elassified civil service, disbursed for annuities, $4,188,258.89; for refunds, $2,203,198.04; for Treasury settlements, $870.18.
9. Returned to the Treasury $485 of the amount appropriated for cost of administration of the retirement act.
10. Allowed 1,330 of the 1,539 claims for annuity on account of age and 946 of the 1,472 claims for annuity on account of disability.
11. Allowed 70,245 of the 76,182 claims for refund made by persons separated from the classified civil service.
12. The amount of the civil service retirement and disability fund June 30, 1922, was $18,134,263.91.
1. A new division of physical edueation and school hygiene was created at the beginning of the present fiscal year, with an additional specialist and clerk.
Heretofore school hygiene and physical education formed a part of the service division.
2. Completed the following reports covering the school year ended June, 1920: (1) Statistics of private high schools and academies; (2) statisties of private business and commercial schools; (3) statistics of teachers' colleges and normal schools; (4) statistics of universities, colleges, and professional schools; (5) statistics of public and private kindergartens; (6) statistics of city school systems; (7) statistics of State school systems.
3. Prepared and eirculated a questionnaire for the American classical league regarding the study of foreign languages in secondary schools.
4. Documents distributed by the Superintendent of Documents for the bureau, 11,596 annual reports of the Commissioner of Education; 598,016 bulletins; 245,485 leaflets, circulars, and miscellaneous publications; 200,000 copies of School Life; and 5,000 copies of the annual index to that periodical.
In all, 1,060,097 documents were distributed.
5. During the year 11,125 letters were received by the home education section of the library division.
This section distributed 83,304 copies of reading courses, an increase over last year of about 30,000; 5,145 lists of courses, and 1,095 bulletins.
New readers were enrolled to the number of 1,143, and 72 readers réceived certificates for completing courses.
6. Received 128,100 letters, 34,013 library publications, and 74,580 statistical reports of various kinds.
An aggregate of 764,942 sheets of mimeographed material was distributed, consisting largely of circulars of information, blanks for office records, questionnaires relating to investigations, bibliographies on educational subjects, etc.
7. The field force in Alaska comprised 5 superintendents, 144 teachers, 8 physicians, 14 nurses, 5 nurses in training, 16 hospital attendants, and 7 herders in charge of reindeer belonging to the Government.
Seventy schools were in operation with an enrollment of approximately 4,000.
Orphanages were conducted at Kanakanak and Tyonek for the care of children left destitute by an epidemic of influenza.
School buildings were erected at Tundra, Sleetmute, Noorvik, Gambell, and Eek.
Hospitals were maintained at Juneau, Kanakanak, Akiak, Nulato, and Noorvik.
As regards reindeer herds, it is estimated that if there has been the usual 20 per cent increase there should now be in Alaska approximately 259,000 reindeer, two-thirds of which belong to the natives and onethird to the Government, to white men, and to Lapps.
The reindeer service has been extended to grazing grounds in the vicinity of the Alaska Railroad, where there is unlimited pasturage for reindeer.
During the past winter a herd of 1,350 reindeer was driven by herders in the employ of the bureau approximately 1,000 miles from a point on the Bering seacoast to the above-mentioned grazing grounds.
In the fall of 1921 a herd of 54 reindeer was transported from the Alaska Peninsula to Kodiak Island.
8. Completed 41 sehool surveys, comprising State system of publie schools, Arkansas; State system of higher education, Kansas; higher educational institutions in Arkansas, Arizona, Oregon, Tennessee, and North Carolina; public-school systems in Trenton, N. J., Washington, D. C., Shreveport, La., and Sparta, Wis.
9. A comprehensive study of rural-school consolidation in the 48 States is in progress, and a report on the present status of ruralschool supervision is now in press.
10. Prepared and assisted in circulating among rural-school officers and others on request 25,070 leaflets and 20,300 circulars on consolidation of schools and transportation of pupils; rural-teachers' library; salaries of teachers in rural schools in 1922; salaries of superintendents and supervisors; modern equipment for a one-room school; and various topics on rural supervision.
Rural conferences were organized in Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, Iowa, and Illinois.
Two motion-picture films were prepared, one depicting methods of supervision, the other showing rural-school consolidation and its results.
A revised list was compiled containing more than 300 rural-school supervisors and professors of rural education in normal schools and colleges.
11. A member of the bureau staff was assigned to take charge of the preparation of the educational exhibit of the United States at the Brazilian International Centennial Exposition.
12. In cooperation with the committee on highway and highway transport education, a number of State conferences for the promotion of education in these fields was held.
Of special note were those conducted in Kentucky, Texas, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Maryland, and Connecticut.
Plans are now under way for a second national conference on highway education, to be held in Washington in October, 1922.
13. Preparing circulars on the following subjects: Comparison of enrollment and endowment at 200 leading American colleges and universities; classification of student enrollment and distribution of teachers in engineering schools; and current statistics on income, salaries, and enrollment at State universities and colleges.
14. Prepared manuscripts on many phases of city-school administration, among them being salaries of teachers in cities of 100,000 population and over, which was published in the report of hearing on Senate bill 3136.
15. The bureau was represented by members of its staff at the Pan American Conference called by the League of Women Voters, and the Pan Pacific Conference on Education held in Honolulu in August, 1921.
16. Conducted and arranged the program of a three-days' conference on the preparation of teachers of manual arts and industrial education, held at the University of Michigan, December 8-10, 1921, and four conferences of specialists in industrial education in Kansas City, Mo., Milwaukee, Wis., Rochester, N. Y., and Cincinnati, Ohio.
A series of regional conferences of teachers and supervisors of home economies was conducted in a number of cities; also 10 regional conferences in commercial education.
17. Compiled 38 new bibliographies on educational topics.
Among the library leaflets issued was"What libraries learned during the war."
The number of volumes from the library loaned to borrowers outside the office was 2,077.
18. Collected and compiled the school laws of the several States, particularly current legislation.
19. Audited the annual reports of the treasurers of land-grant colleges and prepared the annual statement of educational and financial statistics of these institutions.
20. Promoted and encouraged health teaching in the schools.
21. Published 59 bulletins; 2 reports; 21 leaflets and 1 reprint; health education publications, 2, and 7 reprints; reading courses, 4, and 14 reprints; miscellaneous publications, 4; School Life, 5 numbers and index, with 1 supplement.
1. Made geologic surveys in 32 States and Alaska.
2. Continued cooperative geologic work with eight State organizations and with the Republic of Haiti and, through cooperation with governmental organizations and scientifie institutions, made on request special examinations relating to the geology of Hawaii, Iceland, Canada, Peru, the Philippine Islands, Argentina, Colombia, Bolivia, Java, the Pacific islands, Mexico, New Zealand, and Cuba.
3. Made studies of ore deposits in seven States and prepared or began to prepare 21 reports on ore deposits or mining districts.
4. Made field surveys and studies in 13 States with a view to determining the occurrence of oil and gas, prepared or began to prepare 32 reports on present or prospective oil and gas fields, and published maps showing oil and gas fields in Illinois, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and Wyoming.
5. Gave advice as to the adequacy of bids received for leases of oil and gas lands in the Osage Nation.
6. Continued the policy of undertaking intensive study of possible oil-bearing territory in advance of commercial development, carrying on such studies in the Black Hills, Colorado, and Wyoming.
7. Examined deposits of oil shale in four States.
8. Examined coal deposits in three States and prepared or began five reports on coal fields.
9. Cooperated with the Coast and Geodetic Survey and the Bureau of Soils in special investigations whose results may have very practical application.
10. Made comprehensive geologic, topographic, and hydrographic studies of portions of Colorado and San Juan Rivers in Utah and Arizona, with the special object of determining the suitability of certain dam and reservoir sites.
11. Began the preparation of a geologic map of Arizona.
12. Completed studies of the radium-bearing carnotite ores and the tungsten deposits of the United States.
13. Cooperated with the Carnegie Institution in a study of earth movements in connection with earthquakes.
14. Cooperated with the United States Reclamation Service in geologic studies of dam and reservoir sites.
15. Made collections and examinations of fossils from 28 States for stratigraphic identification or correlation.
16. Continued the collection of statistics of mineral production and cooperated in this work with 18 States and the Bureau of the Census.
17. Issued special timely reports on the production of fuels.
18. Continued to obtain and supply information on foreign mineral reserves.
19. Continued the seareh for potash in natural salts in Texas, collecting and examining several hundred samples and finding workable percentages of potash in a number of them.
20. Made 1,720 quantitative analyses of rocks and minerals and over 2,200 qualitative tests of specimens submitted mainly by persons outside of the Survey.
21. Continued investigations of deep-earth temperatures and of the porosity of oil and gas sands.
22. Continued studies of mineral deposits in Alaska.
23. Made geologic surveys covering 2,280 square miles and topographic surveys covering 505 square miles in Alaska.
24. Made topographic surveys in 21 States and Hawaii, partly in cooperation with other Government organizations and with 20 States and the Territory of Hawaii.
26. Ran 3,236 miles of levels and established in connection with them 874 permanent bench marks.
27. Occupied 89 triangulation stations, of which 76 were permanently marked.
28. Ran 2,225 miles of primary traverse and set in connection therewith 483 permanent marks.
29. Prepared shaded relief maps of Alaska, California, Kentucky, and southwestern Arizona, also of several quadrangles and of the area adjacent to the Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad.
30. Continued the compilation of the United States portion of the international map of the world, for which maps of 46 States have now been completed.
31. Prepared a map of China and adjacent regions for the Department of State in connection with the Conference on Limitation of Armament.
32. Made more than 11,000 measurements of stream flow in the United States and Hawaii, doing part of the work in cooperation with other Government organizations and with 31 States and Hawaii.
33. Made investigations of ground water in 10 States and Hawaii.
34. Analyzed 671 samples of surface and underground water.
35. 'Prepared monthly reports on the production of electricity and consumption of fuel by public-utility power plants and published maps of 14 States showing the location of power stations and transmission lines used in public service.
36. Continued investigations of the present and probable future use of surface and ground waters in connection with the classification of public lands.
37. Disposed of more than 25,000 eases referred to the Geological Survey for the preparation of reports thereon to be used in the administration of the public-land laws.
38. Made a net decrease of 459,341 acres in the area previously classified as coal land, a net increase of 268,359 acres in the area classified as phosphate land, and decreases of 3,914,988 acres in outstanding coal reserves, of 110,803 acres in outstanding petroleum reserves, and of 298,846 acres in outstanding phosphate reserves.
39. Acted on 7,638 applications for permit or lease rights under the mineral-lands leasing acts.
40. Defined the boundaries, in accordance with the known geologic structure, of five gas fields and one oil field in Wyoming and Montana.
41. Made plan and profile surveys of Colorado River in Utah and Arizona and of Klamath and Trinity Rivers in California.
42. Made detailed studies of the possibility of developing power on rivers in Washington, Oregon, California, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Utah, and Colorado.
43. Made a net increase of 635,523 acres in power-site reserves.
44. Made field studies with respect to irrigability of lands under the enlarged and stock-raising homestead acts and the Nevada ground-water reclamation act in Colorado, Arizona, Utah, and Nevada.
45. Designated 382,320 acres in Nevada under the ground-water reclamation act.
46.Included 1,160 acres in ‘California in reservoir-site withdrawals.
47. Made net increase of 5,744 acres in public-water reserves, of 3,989,427 acres in enlarged-homestead designations, and of 4,778,633 acres in stock-raising homestead designations.
48. Published 159 reports, containing 9,594 pages, and reprinted 7 reports.
49. Engraved and printed 70 new topographic maps and engraved wholly or in part 36 new topographic maps.
52. Printed under contract for other branches of the Government lithographed maps, charts, etc., in editions amounting to 2,442,227 copies.
53. Distributed 590,284 copies of book publications and 739,310 of map publications, of which 8.253 folios and atlases and 594,217 maps were sold.
1. Continued the construction and operation of irrigation works, and in 1921 irrigated 1,227,500 acres of arid land, covered by project statistics, producing crops valued at $49,620,300.
Including land furnished either in whole or in part with water from the works of the Service, under the Warren Act, the value of crops produced in 1921 amounted to nearly $95,000,000.
2. Operated irrigation works, including 100 storage and diversion dams, 13,600 miles of canals, ditches, and drains, as well as pipe lines, flumes, and tunnels, and thousands of structures incident to the carriage and distribution of the water.
3. Continued the extension of the projects, including the construction of 547 miles of canals, ditches, and drains, 8,775 canal structures, 526 bridges, 170,163 linear feet of pipe, and 36,123 linear feet of flumes, and excavated 12,544,030 cubic yards of earth and rock, the total excavation at the end of the fiscal year amounting to 200,- 577,519 cubic yards.
4. Continued the investigation of the feasibility of a dam in Boulder Canyon on the Colorado River to impound water for the irrigation of lands in Imperial Valley, Calif., and prepared a comprehensive report on the subject, issued as Senate Document 142, and reprinted as a committee print for the House Committee on Irrigation of Arid Lands.
5. Continued preliminary work in connection with the proposed American Falls Dam on Snake River, Idaho.
6. Continued investigations of the possibilities of the international project on the lower Rio Grande.
7. Initiated and continued investigations of scores of secondary projects.
8. Continued active construction of the Tieton Dam to supplement the supply of storage water on the Yakima project, Washington.
9. Continued construction of part 1 of the Mesa division, Yuma project, Arizona, the lands in which were sold under the terms of a special act of Congress of January 25, 1917.
10. Opened to entry 314 farm units, comprising 20,720 acres of irrigable land, practically all of which was filed upon by ex-service men of the World War.
11. Cooperated with the other departments of the Government, with other bureaus of the Interior Department, with State governments, and with numerous local project organizations in the furtherance of reclamation work and the interests of the water users.
12. Continued the work of securing both motion and still pictures of scenes on the projects.
13. Gave numerous illustrated lectures on the work of the service and distributed thousands of feet of motion pictures and many sets of colored slides, with accompanying manuscript, to individuals throughout the country wishing to lecture on the service.
14. Effected numerous and extensive economies in the administration and operation of the service and the projects, resulting in largely increased efficiency at a materially lower cost.
15. Celebrated on June 17, 1922, the anniversary of 20 years of reclamation since the approval of the reclamation act of June 17, 1902.
1. Trained 13,253 men in first aid, 1,106 in mine rescue, and 1,930 in combination first aid and mine rescue work.
2. Described mine safety and rescue work to 86,899 persons during the year.
4. Conducted and assisted in conducting 26 State, local, and company first-aid meets in mining districts.
5. Designed and constructed for the Navy a half-hour oxygen breathing apparatus for fighting fires on shipboard and for penetrating noxious gases.
6. Inspected mine rescue apparatus owned by mining companies and gave advice as to its condition and repairs needed.
7. Formulated a code of procedure in mine rescue, and assisted an international conference in efforts to reach standardization in the use of mine rescue apparatus throughout the world.
8. Produced and distributed free, for educational purposes, motion-picture films on subjects relating to mining and to the health and safety of miners.
9. Issued monthly statistical reports on fatal accidents at coal mines and on fatal and nonfatal accidents in metal mines, quarries, coke ovens, and metallurgical plants, in connection with mine safety work.
11. Furthered the organization in mining districts of chapters of the Joseph A. Holmes Safety Association, the purpose of which is the prevention of accidents and improvement of health conditions, the facilitating of training in first aid, mine rescue, and safety methods, and the promotion of recreational activities.
12. Mining engineers and surgeons made studies and submitted recommendations of metal-mine ventilation, dusts, and their physiological effects on miners in specified regions of California, Utah, Nevada, and in the Lake Superior copper region.
13. Advised the Five Civilized Tribes and the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations regarding efficient mining and safety methods in coal mines on their lands.
14. Continued to investigate explosions and fires in coal mines and to make recommendations to mine operators on causes and the methods of prevention.
15. Assisted the State mining commission of Maryland in the preparation of mine regulations for the State, with especial reference to coal mining.
16. Studied coal-mining methods throughout the country, recommending modern methods where obsolete ones were used, in order to recover a larger proportion of the coal and to increase safety in the mines.
17. Tested 49 field samples of permissible explosives from 31 coal-mining companies in seven States.
These 30 brands from seven makers represented 63 per cent of the permissible explosives used for coal mining in 1920.
All but five samples passed all safety tests made on them.
18. Investigated possibilities of surplus military smokeless powder for industrial use.
Found it useful for blasting ditches, bowlders, and stumps, if it is comminuted or finely ground.
A report gives full details.
19. Continued in Alaska work to promote safety and efficiency in the development of the mineral resources of the Territory.
20. Analyzed coal purchased by the United States Government and other coal, including 5,760 samples and involving 68,740 determinations.
21. Cooperated with the gas industry and the American Gas Association in the study of improved processes for the manufacture and purification of illuminating gas, also of economical fuels for generators.
23. Developed a portable carbon dioxide indicator for adjusting automobile carburetors by gas analysis in order to increase mileage from gasoline.
24. Developed a universal gas mask (weight 81 pounds) and a fireman's gas mask (weight 51 pounds) to protect men against poisonous gases up to 2 or 3 per cent in air.
25. Made a fuel survey of Buffalo, N. Y., to recommend the most economical future supply of fuel to replace natural gas.
26. Devised a grate that makes possible the substitution of lowcost lignite char for anthracite or other coal in a stove.
27. Established by microscopic examination the origin of coorongite, torbanite, certain kerosene shales of Australia, the bog heads of Bathgate, Scotland, and other boghead coals.
28. Continued comprehensive research on timber preservation in metal mines, in cooperation with the United States Forestry Service, as part of the bureau's effort to conserve the nation's supply of wood.
29. Investigated milling methods of zinc in Missouri, Kansas, and Oklahoma and made recommendations for changes that increase the capacity of the mills and improve the recoveries.
30. Prepared a bulletin on aluminum and aluminum-alloy melting practice.
31. Began an investigation of sands for molds and cores in light alloy foundry practice in collaboration with the American Foundrymen's Association and the National Research Council.
32. Investigated means of utilizing tin-plate scrap and old tin cans, demonstrating that a good grade of gray foundry iron and satisfactory castings can be made economically in an electric furnace.
33. Demonstrated that a frothy mixture is the best fire extinguisher for use in zinc-dust fires.
34. Continued to give information and advice to producers of radium.
35. In a cooperative investigation of industrial kilns, changes in method made savings in time of burning of 1 to 50 per cent, and savings in fuel consumed of 10 to 38 per cent, improving also the quality of the brick.
36. Completed study of the clays and shales in the State of Washington.
37. Completed surveys of the soapstone and the slate industries in the United States and made reports that have benefitted the industries both by increasing efficiency in mining and in preventing unwise investments.
38. Repaired a Texas oil well, given up as damaged beyond repair cemented off the water, and brought back a good production.
39. Developed new and important applications for production curves of oil wells, indicating probable length of life of the wells and amount of future production.
40. Completed a study on the protection of oil-field equipment against corrosion.
41. Completed investigation of holding back pressure on oil wells without affecting production of wells.
Research indicates possibility of saving vast quantities of gas now being wasted in producing oil.
42. Completed exhaustive study of Deaner and Slick oil fields, Oklahoma, and made recommendations on drilling, shutting off water in wells, and handling producing wells.
Reports distributed by Bartlesville Chamber of Čommerce.
43. Developed tight-top tanks for storage of crude oil, reducing thereby the loss of oil by evaporation.
Two to four barrels of oil per day are thus saved per tank.
Several oil fields have installed such tanks, saving much oil.
44. Compiled a manual for consumers of gas in homes, showing • how to conserve the supply of natural gas.
45. Identified the gum-forming constituents in motor gasoline.
46. Began a survey of transportation losses of natural gas in pipe lines, especially through leaks, in order to apply corrective measures.
Several gas companies are cooperating.
47. Made two semiannual surveys of motor gasoline used in the different cities of the United States; more than 100 samples collected from nine large cities and analyzed.
Surveys showed good quality of gasoline on the market.
48. In a survey of the crude petroleums of the United States, completed and published, detailed analyses, made on a comparable basis, of samples of crude from northern Texas, Arkansas, northern Louisiana, Kansas, and Oklahoma fields, thus enabling purchasers to judge their relative value.
49. Compiled and distributed monthly reports of total output and stocks of refined petroleum products at the refineries of the United States.
California statistics are compiled at San Francisco office, thus serving the Pacific coast more promptly.
50. Surveyed oil shale resources of Colorado, Utah, and Indiana, and found an almost unequaled supply of fuel for the future in oilshale deposits.
51. Developed accurate and reliable methods for testing oil shales and shale oils.
Began a study of the refining of shale oil.
52. In cooperation with the Kentucky Geological Survey, made a microscopie study of Kentucky oil shales in order to correlate this structure with that of other shales and cannel coals.
53. Supervised the produetion of 18,236,362 barrels of oil on the publie domain for the Government as royalties, which amounted to $4,000,000.
54. Assisted in the Government's work on production of a noninflammable gas for dirigibles by performing the preliminary research necessary to the design of a larger and more efficient plant for recovering the gas.
55. Bought and distributed to Government institutions, in or adjacent to the District of Columbia, 260,000 tonș of coal—185,000 tons delivered by trucks and 75,000 in railroad cars direct to plants having railroad sidings.
56. Supervised operations on Government land leased for development as follows: 208,331 acres of coal lands; 1,920 acres of oil-shale land; 360 acres of phosphate land; and 29,680 acres of potash land.
57. Distributed 348,355 copies of free editions of publications, including 33,614 bulletins, 1,822 annual reports, 64,316 miners' circulars, 80,050 technical papers, and 168,553 miscellaneous printed documents.
1. Handled the largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the national parks; 1922 season, 1,044,502; 1921 season, 1,007,335; 1920 season, 919,504, with less complaints and more compliments than ever before.
2. Handled the largest volume of automobile travel in the history of the national parks; 1922 season, 197,105 cars; 1921 season, 175,825 cars; 1920 season, 128,074 cars.
3. Handled the largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the national monuments; 1922 season, 171,988; 1921 season, 164,461; 1920 season, 138,951.
4. Collected $432,964.89 in revenues from the various operations within the national parks, as against $396,928.27 in 1921 and $316,- :877.96 in 1920.
5. Celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the creation by Congressional act of the Yellowstone National Park, which established and confirmed the national park idea as first enunciated by Cornelius Hedges, a pioneer Montanan.
6. Assumed active jurisdiction of and installed an administrative force in Hawaii National Park, accepting title to private lands therein.
7. Secured donation of valuable tracts of land for enlargement of the Lafayette National Park in Maine through the personal efforts of the superintendent, George B. Dorr; accepted donations of moneys, land, and other gifts from park friends.
8. In cooperation with the United States Public Health Service improved sanitary conditions in several national parks; continued work of mosquito control and prepared plans for extensive and modern sewage disposal and water supply systems.
9. In Hot Springs National Park placed in operation the new Government free bathhouse; under a cooperative arrangement with the Treasury Department by and with the approval of the President appointed a Public Health Service officer superintendent, and in cooperation with the Public Health Service placed in operation the free clinic in connection with the new free bathhouse.
10. In Hot Springs National Park three new bathhouses have been completed and a fourth will shortly be completed, making up a magnificent collection of buildings probably unsurpassed in their kind.
11. Arranged with the various publie operators for increased accommodations and conveniences in the various national parks, particularly in Yellowstone, Yosemite, and Crater Lake; expanded the automobile free public camp grounds to meet increased demands of inflowing motorists and erected a third combined ranger station and community house for accommodation of campers in Yellowstone National Park; and continued the installation of a modern sewer system in Yosemite Valley, Yosemite National Park, and made other improvements and extension in the water-supply system.
12. Granted a new franchise to the new owners of the Crater Lake utility to encourage them in their plans for further comprehensive improvements and extensions in accommodations for visitors to Crater Lake National Park.
13. Arranged for cooperation with the Alaska Road Commission for development of road and trail projects in Mount McKinley National Park.
14. In cooperation with the General Land Office the survey and marking of the Mount McKinley Park boundaries was continued and the surveying and marking of the Lassen Voleanic National Park boundaries was arranged for.
15. Instituted ranger patrol in Lassen Volcanie National Park for the first time and continued cooperation with Forest Service of betterment cf short stretches of road under small appropriation granted by Congress.
16. Stimulated and aided nature study through continuation of free nature guide service in Yosemite and Yellowstone and establishment of such service in Glacier, Mount Rainier, and Sequoia Parks.
Museum exhibits gathered and installed in the various parks to increase opportunities for study.
17. Accomplished greater results in conservation of the wild life of the parks and monuments through more efficient ranger patrol and by reducing effectively the number of predatory animals.
18. Continued fish planting in Yellowstone and Glacier in cooperation with the United States Bureau of Fisheries on the grandest scale yet undertaken.
Cooperated with the State fish commissions in fish planting in other of the larger parks in order to insure the best possible fishing in these waters.
19. Archaeological research work continued in cooperation with the Smithsonian Institution in Mesa Verde National Park and further continued under permit in Chaco Canyon National Monument by the National Geographic Society and School of American Research of Santa Fe.
20. Through landscape engineering division prepared plans for the further development of the national parks; effected construction of new buildings in harmony with their surroundings both for the Government and various public operators and cooperated in laying out roads and trails to develop fully possible scenic accents.
21. Through civil engineering division prepared surveys for important roads and trails; supervised the construction of road projects under way; prepared surveys, estimates, and reports for other needed road work and other engineering projects in the development of the national parks and monuments.
22. Continued work on three important road projects under continuing appropriations by Congress; namely, the Transmountain Road in Glacier National Park, the Carbon River Road in Mount Rainier National Park, and the Middle Fork Road in the Sequoia National Park.
23. Cooperated with highway, automobile, and other associations, as well as with newspapers and magazines in this country and abroad, in the dissemination of information regarding the national parks and monuments.
24. Prepared 447,075 and distributed 169,081 publications relating to the national parks.
Balance of publications not received from Public Printer until after July 1, but since practically all have been distributed to meet demand.
25. Prepared and distributed 180,000 automobile maps of the national parks.
26. Continued visual educational work through loan of motion picture film, lantern slides, and photographs of the national parks.
27. Stimulated interest in the creation of State parks throughout the country through a second State Park Conference held in the Palisades Interstate Park, New York.
28. Continued signing of the national parks and moñuments with standard signs for protection and for guidance of visitors.
29. Maintained protection and continued maintenance and improvement work in several of the national monuments.
30. With one clerk less than in 1920, small Washington office force effectively and expeditiously disposed of 45 per cent more incoming and 78 per cent more outgoing mail than in 1920; revised entire cost system and method of bookkeeping in field to meet modern requirements; entirely revised bookkeeping methods in Washington office not only to meet budget requirements but to simplify and better system, being highly complimented by budget officials on efficiency of new system.
31. Maintained high efficiency of park field personnel under heavy demands made by unprecedented influx of tourists.
32. In addition to above instances of specific accomplishments, kept up the maintenance and improvement work of existing facilities.
The following table shows the number of matters received and disposed of during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1922.
The table is confined to matters docketed and recorded, but does not include a large number of miscellaneous matters of which no formal record is kept, nor does it show in detail the numerous hearings and personal interviews covering many important matters transacted by the bureau.
The war minerals relief claims present a new elass of cases coming before the office and involve appeals from the action of the war minerals relief commissioner under a special act of Congress.
A comparison of the reports for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1921, and the fiscal year ending June 30, 1922, shows a material increase in the total number of matters disposed of during the year 1922.
The output of work for the fiscal year just closed has increased more than one-third.
This increase in the office of the solicitor is indication of the increased efficiency in the several bureaus of the department, as the work for final review increases correspondingly with the volume handled by them.
The number of public-land matters received on appeal and rehearing increased for the year, 187; and the number disposed of was 165 greater.
The increase in the number of pension appeals is very marked.
During the fiscal year 1922 the total number of pension appeals received was 1,231, as against 340 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1921.
The number of miscellaneous matters which have been taken care of by the department shows also a material increase.
The number of such matters disposed of during the fiscal year 1922 is 12,556, as against 9,155 for the fiscal year 1921.
During the fiscal year just closed 81 formal opinions were rendered in response to request from the several different branches of the Department of the Interior.
The increase in the amount of work in the office is not alone indicated by the volume of business transacted but by the great number of new and important questions being presented.
Cases in the courts situate in the District of Columbia in which the department is the defendant are steadily decreasing in number.
There were on June 30, 1922, 19 pending cases, as follows: In the Supreme Court of the United States, 2; in the Court of Appeals, 7; in the Supreme Court of the District, 10.
The number of cases disposed of during the year is 22—by the United States Supreme Court, 5; Court of Appeals, 5; Supreme Court of the District, 12.
Of these, six decisions were unfavorable to the department-United States Supreme Court, 2; Court of Appeals, 1 (by a divided court) ; Supreme Court of the District, 3.
There was a marked decline in the number of new actions instituted-only 7, contrasting with 15 filed during the previous year.
Area of land entered and patented.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1922, is 10,367,153.15 acres, not including 215,419.79 acres embraced in finals not heretofore counted as original disposition of land.
The latter area is constituted as follows: Public auction 74,811.52 acres; abandoned military reservations, 554.21 acres; cash and private sales, individual claimants and small holding claims, 10,761.16 acres; preemption entries, 10,360.22 acres; soldiers' additional homesteads, 6,410.93 acres; timber and stone entries, 42,557.96 acres; mineral entries, 69,317.97 acres; coal entries, 645.82 acres.
The area of 10,367,153.15 acres is a decrease of 5,264,477.81 acres as compared with the area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 1921.
Of the total area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 1922, 7,070,175.54 acres were allowed under the stock-raising homestead act of December 29, 1916.
The area patented during the fiscal year 1922 is 12,904,821.57 acres, an increase of 2,787,011.82 acres as compared with the fiscal year 1921.
Of the above area 9,632,635.57 acres were patented under the homestead laws, an increase of 1,459,833.41 acres, not including as homesteads 6,242.40 acres patented as soldiers' additional entries.
Cash receipts and expenditures.
The total cash receipts from sales, leases, and other disposition of public lands (including receipts for copies of records, sales of Government property, etc.) for the fiscal year 1922, were $8,813,659.16; from sales of Indian lands, $545,711.91; and from leases of naval petroleum reserve lands, $2,425,- 324.65; an aggregate of $11,784,695.72, all of which was deposited in the Treasury.
Five per cent of the net receipts from cash sales of public lands are paid to the public land States within which such sales were made, and the balance of such net receipts from the States ineluded within the reclamation act, together with the net receipts from fees and commissions from the same States.
All other moneys received were covered into the Treasury to the credit of the general fund.
It may be noted from the above table that after deposits of receipts for the benefit of special purposes, reclamation fund, State fund, and Indian trust funds, there remains a balance of $3,848,598.42 to the credit of the general fund to be appropriated by Congress.
As the total expenditures for the conduct of the business of the General Land Office, including the expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers and incidental expenses ($825,521.02), for the fiscal year 1922 amounted to $3,200,168.86, it will be seen that the cost of operation of the General Land Office was $648,429.56 less than the amount credited from its receipts to the general fund.
Disbursements from the following special deposit trust funds and reimbursable appropriations are not included in the above figures as receipts or expenditures: From deposits by individuals for surveying public lands, $54,250.67; from completing surveys within railroad land grants, $24,712.84; from opening Indian reservations (reimbursable), $185.12; from deposits by individuals for resurveys.
1,010.01; from Indian moneys, proceeds of labor, surveying, etc. (Crow act of June 4, 1920), $9,526.28.
Field service.
The total amount of cash collected and turned into the Treasury as result of the work of the field force during the past year was $199,059.79; of this amount $11,267.96 was in settlement of timber trespass cases and $8,677.45 was secured from timber sales: $179,114.38 was recovered through civil and criminal action in cases of depredations on the public lands and violations of the public land laws; in addition there has been turned into the Treasury $4,103.11, royalty on coal mined from a tract in Colorado.
Investigations in the field have resulted in the restoration of 117,535 acres, of which area 11,935 acres were restored on the abatement of unlawful inclosures without suit.
The reports of special agents cover 17,570 acres, of which 3,071 were adversely and 14,499 favorably reported.
Two hundred and eighty-seven hearings in Government contest cases have been held; civil suits in 48 cases were recommended, 38 suits were won and 14 lost; as a result of the successful prosecution of these cases, $178,664.38 were recovered and 1,477.29 acres were restored to the public domain; 51 indictments were reported for offenses under the public land laws; 11 criminal cases tried resulted in conviction under which four prison sentences were imposed and fines amounting to $450 paid.
At the end of the last fiscal year 14,319 cases were pending for investigation; at the close of this fiscal year there are only 11,018, a reduction of 3,301 cases.
Surveys.
Notwithstanding the increasing difficulties attendant upon field work, the production this year so far as it can be measured on a mileage basis amounted to over 27,000 miles of line, at an average cost of less than $18 per linear mile, a greater output at lesser cost than has been accomplished for several years past.
The area of lands surveyed and resurveyed during the fiscal year amounted to 6,151,892 acres.
The Commissioner submits a summary of reports from the offices of surveyors general showing the status of work in these offices, from which it appears that there is now no arrearage in any of said offices.
Map making and drafting.
In addition to the ordinary work under this head, a map of Oregon has been revised and issued, while revisions of the Nebraska map are in the hands of the lithographer.
Special work in this line was also performed on the request of the Department of Justice in the case of the State of Oklahoma v. The State of Texas, pending in the United States Supreme Court, as well as the preparation of an enlarged facsimile of the General Land Office map as a contribution to the Brazilian International Centennial Exposition at Rio de Janeiro.
Tract-book notations.
The total number of notations were 379,- 396; this includes 95,183 appeals and other miscellaneous cases; 7,221 Indian allotments, 31,512 final and cash certificates, and 38,248 original entries; plats posted, 1,529.
Homestead and kindred entries.
At the beginning of the fiscal year 9,715 cases were pending; received during the year, 59,544; pending at end of the year, 2,922.
This work is now current, and hereafter cases will be disposed of in the order of their receipt.
Soldiers' additional entries.
One hundred twenty-four new cases were received during the year, while 180 applications have received final action.
This work is now practically eurrent.
Stock-raising homesteads.
During the past year 17,922 entries were allowed, covering an area of 7,070,175.54 acres.
Eight thousand three hundred ninety-nine patents were issued under the act during the past year, embracing 2,919,819.67 acres.
Stoek driveways.
The area withdrawn for this purpose during the past year aggregates 96,590 acres, inclusive of scattered entries of patented tracts; and that released from such withdrawal, 101,863 acres.
Townsite entries and town-lot sales.
The commissioner reports the establishment of a number of new townsites during the year, notably Harding, in the State of Florida, and Veteran, in the State of Wyoming, at the latter of which a town-lot sale was held at which 38 lots were sold for the aggregate sum of $5,835.
The town-site trust at Fairbanks, Alaska, has been closed, showing a balance to the credit of the town of $7,200.
Minnesota drainage.
During the past year there were approved for patenting 123 cash entries made under the act of May 20, 1908, involving an area of 19,680 acres.
Rights of way.
During the year 238 railroad rights of way came before the office for action, and 176 are pending at the close of the year.
Three hundred and ninety-two irrigation and miscellaneous applications under other rights-of-way laws were received and 98 remaining for disposal at the end of the year, as against 123 at the beginning of the year.
Forfeiture of rights of way.
Three hundred thirty-eight approved rights of way have been canceled.
The work of clearing the records of rights of way subject to forfeiture is being vigorously prosecuted.
State irrigation districts.
During the year five applications, having a total gross area of 149,082.60 acres, received departmenta! approval and 12 were otherwise acted upon.
On July 1, 1922, nine applications were awaiting action.
Private irrigation projects.
During the past year 30 new reports and 15 supplemental reports were received as result of investigation.
During the same time final action has been taken upon reports involving 82 irrigation projects, in which 52 cases, affecting 300 entries and applications, the conclusions reached were in favor of the project; in 23 cases, affecting about 100 entries, the conclusions reached were adverse; while nine cases were closed without any definite conclusion, no desert land entries or applications being now involved.
Federal water-power act.
Water-power applications aggregating 674,637 acres were received during the year, as against 552,590 acres the year previous.
During the year $7,671.48 have been received in payment of sums due under permits issued prior to the passage of the Federal water-power act.
This is $2,219.89 more than the amount received in 1921.
Carey Aet.
Segregations aggregating 167,459.20 acres were finally disposed of during the year, of which area 35,870.36 acres were patented to the several States and 131,588.84 acres represented segregations that were canceled.
Irrigation of arid lands in Nevada.
Twenty-three applications from Elko and 147 from Carson City have been received under the Pittman Act during the current year; 40 Elko and 160 Carson City permits have been issued during the year, while 31 Elko and 98 Carson City permits have been canceled.
Indications under this act are promising, although the time for submitting proofs has not arrived.
Desert-land entries.
Six thousand seven hundred and eighty-six applications and entries of all descriptions were received; 1,156 cases remained for office action July 1, 1922, leaving the work practically current; 1,659 desert entries went to patent, as against 1,599 the year previous, and 2,188 original entries were received.
United States reclamation projects.
Original entries allowed during the year were 475, as against 356 the year previous; while 777 final entries were approved for patent, as against 428 last year.
Withdrawals and restorations.
During last year 416,435 aeres of public lands were withdrawn under the various acts applicable thereto, and 6,236,612 acres theretofore withdrawn or reserved were restored to entry or other proper disposition.
The commissioner furnishes a statement showing the specifie acreage withdrawn or restored under the several acts authorizing such action.
Restorations and openings subject to the preference right of exservice men.
Since the last report 475,790 acres have been restored from withdrawal and 1,836,900 acres opened to entry subject to the provisions of the joint resolution of January 21, 1922.
State grants and State selections,—Receipts amounted during the year to 285,968.16 acres, while 933,571.28 acres were finally adjudicated; and 814,734.81 acres of indemnity school land and 91,866.94 acres of quantity grant land being conveyed to the States.
Swamp and overflowed lands.
During the year patents were issued for 7,770.58 acres under the swamp-land grant, while selections aggregating 4,894.43 acres were rejected.
Abandoned military reservations.
The largest tract of land of this ¿esignation disposed of during the year embraced 55,178 acres located near Deming, N. Mex., which was opened to homestead entry.
Chippewa logging operations, Minnesota.
For the timber cut under contract entered into under the act of June 27, 1902, there were received during the year $5,872.24, while $185.63 were collected for timber cutting, trespass, and payments made for extensions of time, amounting to $15,692.27, and as overhead charges, $7,061; the total receipts for the year were $28,811.14.
Railroad grants and selections were received during the year to the amount of 740,995.88 acres, as compared with 1,307,546.30 acres in 1921; there were allowed and patented 1,490,397.93 acres, as compared with 713,210.32 acres in 1921.
Coos Bay wagon road lands.
A timber sale of 9,675,000 feet, board measure, is reported, for which $23,146.20 were received.
Oregon and California railroad lands.
Nineteen sales of timber were reported, involving 3,402.57 acres, containing 110,725,000 feet, board measure, for which the sum of $198,529.68 was received.
Under the act of May 31, 1918, exchanges were consummated in two cases, in which the United States received an aggregate of 23,669.61 acres and gave in return 22,270.71 acres.
Indian allotments.
New applications for allotments under section 4 of the act of 1887 were filed in 153 cases, while 433 were approved and 305 were canceled.
Trust patents numbering 6,805, covering an area of 495,808.25 acres, and 2,265 fee patents, with an area of 252,- 560.33 acres, were issued.
Colville Indian Reservation.
Opening of the remaining unentered lands in the south half of this reservation, with a preference right to ex-service men, is noted.
Lieu selections for lands in Indian reservations.
During the year 118 selections were approved and patented, aggregating an area of 439,927 acres.
Forest lieu selections.
During the past year there were approved for patenting 266 selections, covering an approximate area of 51,892.92 acres.
National forest.
There are now 148 national forests, embracing an area of 181,799,997 acres, of which a little over 86 per cent is public land.
The net increase in national forest area since the beginning of the fiscal year is 13,866 acres.
Mineral lands.
An increase over the year previous of 300 more applications for mineral patents under the general provisions of the mining law are noted; otherwise the principal activities of the year have been under the mineral leasing act.
Five hundred and seventy-four mineral patents were issued for an area of 53,043 acres.
Coal leases and permits.
Applications for 568 coal prospecting permits, aggregating 210,404 acres, and 24 leases, aggregating 11,248 acres, and 13 licenses aggregating 520 acres, were issued.
Alaska coal.
No coal leases were issued during the year.
There are now outstanding seven leases, which embrace 6,540 acres in the Bering River field, 2,520 acres in the Matanuska field, 1,440 acres in the Cook Inlet field, and 566 acres in the Nenana field; eight coal prospecting permits were issued out of 20 applications filed.
Oil and gas activities.
Under section 14 of the leasing law, 10 leases were issued, embracing 4,860 acres of land.
Under section 17 of said act, two leases were issued, covering 70.91 acres of land in California, and 20 leases, covering 6,260 acres of land in the Salt Creek field, Wyoming; the total bonus paid for the two leases in California was $9,160, and for the tracts in Wyoming, $1,687,000.
New applications for 4,598 oil-prospecting permits under sections 13 and 20 of the leasing act were filed, 4,985 permits were granted, and 3,107 rejected; 4,996 remain for final action.
At the beginning of the fiscal year there were pending for action 820 applications under the relief sections of the leasing act, and during the year 65 were received; now pending at the close of the year 389, in all of which some action has been taken.
Under these sections there were issued during the year 84 leases, covering 17,455 acres, and 181 prospecting permits for·133,290 acres, while 231 applications were rejected or otherwise disposed of.
Oil and gas permits in Alaska.
Since the date of the passage of the mineral-leasing act 994 applications for permits have been received in the General Land Office, out of which number 603 permits have been issued and 32 applications rejected.
Receipts under the mineral-leasing aet.
The receipts under the mineral-leasing act of February 25, 1920, for the fiseal year 1922 were $8,799,468.17, of which $6,374,143.52 were from public lands and $2,425,324.65 were from naval petroleum reserve lands.
Contests.
During the year the General Land Office has disposed of 1,110 litigated and 2,237 unappealed cases.
With the exception of mineral cases, now well in hand, this class of work is current.
Repayments.
Under the several laws allowing repayment there were stated during the last fiscal year 2,526 accounts, allowing repayment of $249,244.17, and during the same time 557 claims for repayment were denied.
Alaska.
Since Congress authorized the extension of the rectangular system of the public-land surveys to the Territory over 1,550,000 acres have been surveyed, substantially confined to agricultural areas, the coal fields, and such adjoining lands as might under normal conditions be attractive to settlers.
During the last fiscal year 73 original homestead entries were made, embracing an area of 10,611 acres, while 71 final entries were made for 12,377 acres.
In conclusion.
The commissioner notes a successful effort during the year to bring up the arrearage of work which he found on assuming the duties of his office, with very satisfactory results.
Special attention is called to the fact that approximately 5,000 more patents were issued during 1922 than in 1921, involving an increase of 2,787,011.81 acres.
Final homestead entries are now acted upon within from 30 to 90 days after the issuance of final certificate.
Progress and needs in Indian education.
Seven supervisors of long experience in school work thoroughly covered the Indian country last year.
Every Indian school was visited once or more, all facilities were carefully studied with a view to their highest utilization, and a campaign conducted for the largest possible enrollment.
The average attendance in all schools was increased 3,000 above any previous record.
Government boarding schools were filled beyond their capacities.
The number of Indian children in public schools was greatly increased.
The teaching personnel was more permanently organized, its efficiency improved, and a spirit of progress evidenced by reading-course study and a large attendance at summer schools of methods.
A revision of the course of study, with uniform semiannual examinations, was made effective and, responsive to the executive appeal for public economy, was supplemented by special instruction through the year on“prevention of waste.
A survey of school needs showed that approximately 18,000 Indian children fit for attendance were not provided for, nine States having from 1,000 to 7,500 each of this neglected class.
It is estimated that of these the public schools will soon meet the demand in all but two or three States, but that in the Navajo country of the Southwest no early aid can be expected from the State, and, therefore, Federal provision for from ten to twelve thousand children is imperative in that region.
This should come without delay by enlargement of existing boarding schools and the construction of new ones.
It is false economy and a public danger to allow children to grow up in this country without being taught the English language and manual skill in some useful occupation.
Better health.
The Indian Bureau operated 12 tuberculosis hospitals, 31 school, 10 agency, and 27 general hospitals, with a combined bed capacity of 2,411.
Actively in its health work are 150 physicians, regular and contract, 81 nurses, and 70 field matrons, who respond faithfully to the Indian's increasing acceptance of the white man's medical treatment.
There were but few epidemics last year on the reservations, and pressing needs were reasonably met.
But the Indian country is large, the duties arduous, attended often with difficulties of travel and poor living conveniences.
The funds available do not admit of adequate compensation or a grading of this service to higher efficiency.
Our health work should be supplemented by more social uplift and sanitation in Indian homes.
To lead in this direction and to discover what is practicable, arrangements have been made for three trained nurses from the American Red Cross to devote a year to reservation work and survey.
Reports of their study and cooperation with field matrons are expected to furnish a basis for larger plans and more effective health work.
Industrial activity.
Farming progress for the year was creditable in the character and extent of cultivation and the use of modern methods and implements.
Experimentation was widened to include tests with Peruvian alfalfa, Mexican June corn, Bermuda onions, dates, etc.
Growing interest was manifested in agricultural fairs.
Special gains were made to the sheep industry of the Southwest by the introduction of pure-bred rams to the Indians' flocks, about 500 being supplied to the Navajo reservations.
Many stockgrowers' associations have been formed by the Indians, which in some instances have assumed responsibility for the repayment of reimbursable funds.
A successful exhibit of Indian arts and crafts was made at the Chautauqua Convention of the Federation of Women's Clubs with a view to stimulating interest in this artistic and useful handiwork.
A general aggressive movement went forward last spring for improved Indian homes and surroundings, more and better farming, greater interest in live stock, superintendents in company with other employees making a thorough canvass of their reservations for the purpose of inducing every family to make the best use of its resources.
The Blackfeet Reservation, Mont., made a notable response, registering 90 per cent of Indians on allotments as engaged in farming and reducing their ration list about 50 per cent.
The employment of Indians, adults and students, in many self-supporting activities was remunerative and promising beyond any previous record.
Cooperative road work.
It is expected that road building on the reservations will be stimulated under a ruling of the Comptroller General interpreting section 3 of the Federal highway act so as to permit the State wherein an Indian reservation is located to defray from Government funds apportioned under the act the entire cost of that portion of any public highway across the reservation, the State to make provision for upkeep, as in other cases.
Irrigation.
An important diversion dam across the Gila River, Ariz., was completed last year, embracing 35,000 acres of Indian land and 27,000 acres under white ownership.
Another across the Big Horn River, Mont., was completed and will be of great benefit to the Crow Reservation lands.
Other like construction is in progress.
A contract under negotiation is expected to supply additional water to the Salt River Indians, Arizona, and disputes have been adjusted to the advantage of Indians on the Tule River Reservation, Calif., and the Uintah Reservation, Utah.
There is now an irrigable area of approximately 605,000 acres on 50 Indian reservations.
Landed interests.
During the year 5,774 allotments of land were made to individual Indians, covering nearly 700,000 acres, largely on the Blackfeet and Flathead Reservations, Mont., but also in eight other States.
Allotments on the public domain embraced over 45,000 acres, and schedules are pending for other reservation allotments.
Under the present conservative policy of issuing patents and certificates of competency to Indians, 911 fee patents, 186 certificates of competency, and 29 removals of restrictions were issued, involving 148,490 acres.
Sales of original and inherited allotments aggregated $2,232,833, and under amended regulations purchasers on the deferred payment plan are enabled to assign their interests.
Approximately $9,000, the full amount available, was expended in the purchase of small tracts for homeless Indians in California.
Chippewas in Minnesota.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs gave special attention to problems of the Chippewas in Minnesota, including a personal visit to the reservations, and arranged for a commission to look carefully into all matters complained of by these Indians, particularly as to their demand for compensation for land and standing timber thereon in what is now known as the Minnesota National Forest, with a view to asking Congress to enact whatever legislation may be equitably needed.
Also requested the Department of Justice to bring original action in the Supreme Court of the United States to determine the respective rights of the Chippewas and the State of Minnesota to swamp lands in the reservations of that State.
Forestry.
Because of depression in the lumber market no large offerings of timber were made.
The J. S. Stearns Lumber Co. completed its logging operations on the Bad River Reservation, Wis., in September, 1921, having cut nearly a billion and a quarter feet of timber since 1894, from which the Indians received about $7,000,000.
The Indian Service manufactured last year 15,000,000 feet of lumber at the Menominee mills, Wisconsin.
Forest fires were light during the year.
Suppression of liquor traffic.
Prosecutions against bootleggers, moonshine stills, and the introduction of various poisonous concoctions have been conducted vigorously within the available appropriation, which has been reduced from $150,000 in 1919 to $35,000 for the past year.
The most successful work has been done in cooperation with local and State officials.
Peyote.
This narcotic drug, pronounced by scientific authorities to be injurious to both mental and physical structure, is gaining a stronger hold on the Indians in various localities, and prohibitory or regulating legislation is greatly needed.
The Indian Bureau has issued a pamphlet containing much reliable information on this subject which, if generally known, would strengthen public opinion against an evil of alarming tendencies.
Pensions for Indian scouts.
Within the year nearly 100 Indian scouts were awarded pensions on account of their military services.
The Indian Office and agency superintendents render assistance in the preparation of these claims, many of which are now pending.
Five Civilized T'ribes.
The most important work remaining to be done for these tribes relates to the property interests of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, valued at about $13,500,000, and to the educational, industrial, and home-building affairs of the restricted class having one-half or more Indian blood, now numbering approximately 17,900.
Restrictions against alienation of land, both conditional and unconditional, were removed in 740 cases, and $2,334,220 were expended from individual Indian moneys for maintenance, farms, buildings, live stock, and equipment.
The amount of these funds received during the year was $4,362,059.
Indian farmers made excellent progress, and the attendance of Indian children in the public schools was increased.
Leased 130,415 aeres for oil and gas mining.
The gross oil production for the year was 8,181,971 barrels, and the total revenue to restrieted Indians from oil and gas leases, $3,897,619.32.
Oil and gas outside the Five Civilized Tribes.
The advance in the market price of oil from $1 to $2 a barrel quickened activities in this industry on the reservations.
A 300-barrel oil well, with large gas production, was completed in the Otoe field, Oklahoma.
Five new wells came in on the Shoshone Reservation, Wyo.
In Montana two wells were begun on the Blackfeet Reservation, and five wells on the Crow Reservation are producing from 2,000 to 3,000 barrels a day.
Test wells are now in progress on the Navajo Reservations in Arizona and New Mexico, where 4,800 acres of tribal land have been leased, and two gas wells, with a combined production of about 38,000,000 cubic feet per day, were brought in on the Ute Mountain Reservation, N. Mex.
The Osage Reservation, Okla., continues to be the most attractive oil field, where one tract of 160 acres last year sold for a bonus of $1,600,000 and several others for more than $1,000,000 each.
The year's sales of Osage leases embraced 102,192 acres for a total bonus of $22,105,500.
Probate work.
Disposed of 3,164 heirship cases, 341 wills, and handled about 4,000 miscellaneous cases involving minor matters.
Fees aggregating more than four-fifths of the annual appropriation for this work were earned, to be covered into the Treasury of the United States.
With a view to the greatest economy consistent with imperative needs, the probate districts in eastern Oklahoma were reduced from 17 to 8 at the beginning of the year.
Pueblo Indians of New Mexico.
Considered the report of an attorney appointed by the Department of Justice to look thoroughly into all titles, land grants, individual holdings, disputes concerning water rights, etc., affecting the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, and requested additional legislation to enable the fair adjustment of these important matters of long standing (Senate bill 3855).
Purchase of transportation and supplies.
Purchased supplies costing approximately $4,500,000 at a substantial saving, resulting from close study of conditions that pointed to falling prices and by utilizing surplus property of other Government departments and cooperating with the supply activities of the Bureau of the Budget.
Quapaw lead and zinc mining lands.
Owing to conflicting claims among applicants for renewal of leases of valuable Quapaw mining lands, Oklahoma, the regulations were modified to provide for leasing under sealed bids upon specifications especially prepared as to the tracts involved, which thus far has resulted in awards that promise greater benefits and protection to both the Indian owners and the lessees.
Number of pensioners.
There were on the roll at the end of the fiscal year 547,016 pensioners, a net loss of 19,037 from the total of 566,053 on the roll at the beginning of the year.
The number of Civil War soldiers on the roll June 30, 1921, was 218,775, and on June 30, 1922, 193,881, showing a decrease of 24,894.
The number of deaths of Civil War soldiers in 1922 was 25,082, as against 24,775 in 1921.
The number of Civil War widows, minor children, and dependents on the roll June 30, 1921, was 281,327, and on June 30, 1922, 272,194, showing a decrease of 9,133.
The deaths of Civil War widows, minor children, and dependents in 1922 numbered 21,259, as against 19,451 in 1921.
The highest number of Civil War soldiers on the roll was in 1898, when there were 745,822.
The highest number of Civil War widows on the roll was in 1912, when there were 304,373.
Of the War of 1812, there were surviving on June 30, 1922, 49 widows.
Öf the War with Mexico, there were on the roll June 30, 1922, 73 soldiers and 1,878 widows.
Of the Indian wars from 1817 to 1891, there were June 30, 1922, on the roll, 3,867 soldiers and 2,748 widows.
Of the War with Spain there were on the roll under the provisions of the general laws 14,445 soldiers and 3,283 widows, minor children, and dependents; under the act of July 16, 1918, 5,915 widows and minor children; and under the act of June 5, 1920, 31,510 soldiers; a total of 55,153 War with Spain pensioners on June 30, 1922.
By classes the pension roll showed on June 30, 1922, 256,828 soldiers, 282,965 widows, 2,106 minor children, 927 helpless children, 4,100 dependents, and 90 nurses.
The names of 374 persons were June 30, 1922, on “the Army and Navy medal of honor roll" under the act of April 27, 1916, and in receipt of the special pension of $10 per month for life allowed by said act.
Unexpended balances of appropriations.
Disbursements for pensions.
The amount disbursed in the payment of pensions for the year was $253,807,583, as against $258,720,821 for the preceding year.
The number of pensioners residing in foreign countries in 1922 was 3,170, and the amount paid to these pensioners was $1,319,231.39.
Certificates issued and applications filed.
During the fiscal year there were issued on admitted claims 64,967 pension certificates; reissues in lieu of lost certificates, 1,340; accrued pension orders, 10,011; reimbursement orders, 5,873.
The amounts allowed as reimbursement for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners in 1922 were $488,248.28.
There were received and classified in the law division during the year 114,251 applications of all kinds, of which 47,710 were under the act of May 1, 1920, and 39,650 under the act of June 5, 1920.
During the fiscal year 1922 there were handled 1,360,428 pieces of incoming mail, as against 1,007,221 pieces in 1921, and 3,782,405 pieces of outgoing mail, as against 3,862,090 pieces in 1921.
There were received in 1922 for addresses of pensioners, photographic copies of papers, etc., in fees prescribed by act of August 24, 1912, $10,721.07; as refundments to pension appropriations, $11,- 867.35; and as miscellaneous receipts, $1,620.47.
A comparative cost report.
In the fiscal year 1922, 130,736 claims were disposed of, at a cost for salaries and other expenses of administration of $1,570,238, or $12.01 per claim disposed of; in 1921, 91,515 claims were disposed of, at a cost of $1,585,291, or $17.33 per claim disposed of.
In 1922 there were 2,269,767 checks issued in payment of pensions, at a cost for salaries and expenses of $226,308, or 10 cents per payment; in 1921 the number of pension checks issued was 2,332,939, at a cost of $265,480, or 11% cents per payment.
It is gratifying to note a decrease in cost of adjudication of claims and payment of pensions, due largely to changes and readjustments made by the present administration with a view to an increase of efficiency in service.
During the past fiscal year the department rendered several decisions, notably those in the McCourt case, defining "volunteer" service in the war with Spain; in the Harvey case, interpreting the meaning of the term "vicious habits" in the act of June 5, 1920; and in the Kennedy case, concerning the date of commencement of the $72 rate under act of May 1, 1920, which modified the practice of the Pension Bureau and enabled it to take favorable action in claims heretofore adversely acted upon because of narrow, restricted, and technical interpretations of law.
The demand for monthly payment of pensions has been met by the enactment of a law providing that pensions shall be paid monthly from and after September 4, 1922.
This means the preparing and mailing monthly of approximately 600,000 checks, as against 200,000 under the quarterly payment system.
Congress has provided the necessary additional force and equipment.
Congress has authorized a temporary force for the purpose of making current the work of the Pension Bureau by June 30, 1923.
This additional force has been selected with great care and is now supplementing the efforts of the regular force to dispose of the arrearage of claims and make current the work of the bureau.
Administration of retirement act of May 22, 1920.—During the past fiscal year the act of May 22, 1920, was amended by the act of February 14, 1922, simplifying methods of reporting information to the Pension Bureau necessary to settlement of claims for refund.
By act of March 27, 1922, the expression occurring in the act of May 22, 1920, “all employees in the classified civil service of the United States" was construed.
The act of June 17, 1922, includes in the retirement act certain classes of employees receiving less than $600 per annum and an Executive order, dated June 7, 1922, brought within the purview of the retirement law certain groups of unclassified laborers.
On July 1, 1921, there were 7,117 claims of all classes pending under the act of May 22, 1920; received during the year 72,829 claims and reopened 694 claims; disposed of 75,734 claims, leaving 4,906 pending June 30, 1922.
The work of the retirement division is practically current.
The "civil service retirement and disability fund," July 1, 1921, amounted to $9,672,842.03; during the year $14,853,748.99 were added to said fund and $6,392,327.11 disbursed, leaving surplus of $18,134,- 263.91 in the fund on June 30, 1922.
The appropriation for the cost of administration for the past fiscal year was $50,000; expenditures were $49,515, leaving an unexpended balance of $485.
The civil service retirement law has now been in operation for two years, and the experience of the Pension Bureau leads to the conclusion that its enactment is amply justified.
From an administrative standpoint but few changes appear to be needed to carry into effect the provisions of the law.
One suggested amendment is that compulsory retirement should become operative at an earlier date than now fixed by the law.
For instance, those now eligible for retirement at age of 70 should have the option of retiring at 65; that retention beyond 65 should be by mutual agreement between employees and the head of the department or independent establishment in which employed; and that no employee should be continued in service beyond 70 years of age.
On the question of increase of annuities, it is suggested that the present scale should be revised so as to provide a somewhat larger annuity for all classes and especially for those for whom the law now provides less than $30 per month.
The subject of increase in annuities and the elimination of certain inequalities in the present law and its seale of annuities will be taken up by the board of actuaries in their second annual report upon the actual operations of the retirement act to be submitted through the department to Congress in December, 1922.
In the year ending June 30, 1920, when the total number of applications jumped to 102,940 from 75,657 of the previous year, it was believed that high-water mark had been reached.
Yet in 1921 the number rose to 107,656, and in the year just closed to 113,597, comprising over 94,000 patent applications, over 17,000 trade-mark applications, and over 2,300 print and label cases.
Congress granted relief near the close of the fiscal year by inereasing salaries of the technical corps and providing a small increase in the force.
Revolutionary changes have been made in the methods of doing business, economies have been effected, and good results have been derived from the increase in salaries, but to offset all this the volume of work has been so great and so unexpected that the office is getting further in arrears, so that at the close of the fiscal year 8 out of 49 divisions are a year behind with their work.
The office made 291,446 official actions and granted 41,203 patents during the year, yet 69,944 patent applications, besides 5,972 in the trade-mark office, are awaiting official action—in all 75,916 applications.
Up to three years ago this office received about 8,000 trade-mark applications a year.
In the year just closed over 17,000 trade-mark applications were received.
The general patent work increase in volume during the last three years has been over 50 per cent.
The increase in force, including that granted by the recent Congress, has been but a fraction of this percentage.
It is obvious, therefore, that in view of the excessive influx of work, all out of proportion to the previous receipts, that a large addition to the force is essential for the efficient working of this bureau.
The building is now overcrowded, every nook and corner being utilized.
The accretion of permanent records is so large that immediate measure of relief to provide adequate quarters is absolutely essential.
In spite of the increased expenditures of the office, due to its partial reorganization, the increase in receipts more than kept pace therewith, providing a net surplus for the fiscal year of $172,081.21.
It is thus seen that the industries are paying for a service which the Government could afford to enlarge and make more efficient to the relief of those industries without entailing any burden of taxation upon the general public.
Organization.
The reorganization of the bureau referred to in the last report has worked very well.
The importance of the work in school hygiene and physical education has justified the employment of an additional specialist and an additional clerk.
At the beginning of the new fiscal year the commissioner decided to take this work out of the service division, where it had been assigned, and created a new division of physical education and school hygiene.
For administrative reasons it was deemed advisable to place the work in statistics temporarily under the supervision of the chief of the city schools division.
Educational research and promotion.
Field service, which is one of the important functions of the bureau, is mostly done at the request of the school authorities in the several States.
During the fiscal year 26 members of the bureau staff, exclusive of the commissioner, rendered an aggregate of 1,090 days of field service outside of the District of Columbia, in 41 different States.
In addition, 23 days were spent in visiting European schools, 32 days in Hawaii, and 1 day in Canada.
Eighteen members of the staff, exclusive of the commissioner, delivered 257 public addresses, in 24 different States, to audiences aggregating 70,000 persons.
During the year the Commissioner of Education traveled approximately 75,000 miles, attending and conducting educational conferences, assisting in educational campaigns, and addressing educational and civic associations and clubs.
Researeh and investigation.
Educational surveys constitute an important activity of the bureau, far reaching in effect, and productive of concrete results.
Total number of surveys, 41.
The surveys made during the past fiscal year are almost a third of the total number of surveys made by the bureau in the 54 years of its previous existence.
Rural-schools division.
The division has prepared and assisted in circulating among rural-school officers and others on request 25,070 leaflets and 20,300 circulars on subjects appertaining to rural school work.
During the year members of the division have visited 22 different States for the purpose of investigating school conditions, holding or attending conferences on rural education, making addresses at educational meetings, and assisting in educational surveys.
Rurallife conferences were organized by members of the division in Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, Iowa, and Illinois.
Under the direction of the division, two motion-picture films were prepared, one showing methods of supervision, the other showing rural-school consolidation and its results in the United States.
The division is engaged in making a comprehensive study of rural-school consolidation in the 48 States, and a report on the present status of rural-school supervision is now in press.
Higher-education division.
In addition to making the surveys of higher-educational institutions, noted above, a number of bulletins and pamphlets were prepared on various phases of college and university education.
The specialist in rural and technical education, in cooperation with the committee on highway and highway transport education, held a number of State conferenees for the promotion of education in these fields; also a conference on Negro land-grant colleges, in cooperation with the Federal Board for Vocational Education and the United States Department of Agriculture.
City-schools division.
This division, in addition to its surveys of city-school systems, ete.
As a result of this meeting the bureau was requested by the city superintendents of schools to serve as a clearing house of information on this phase of school development.
Service division.
This division comprises work in school hygiene and physical education, industrial education, home economies, commercial education, educational legislation, and foreign education.
In the field of health education the division has centered its efforts mainly on stimulation and encouragement of health teaching in the schools.
A considerable amount of service was rendered in the field of schoolhouse construction and sanitation.
The specialist in industrial education arranged the program and conducted a three-days conference on the preparation of teachers of manual arts and industrial education, held at the University of Michigan, December 8-10, 1921, and four conferences of specialists in industrial education in Kansas City, Mo., January 4; Milwaukee, Wis., January 11; Rochester, N. Y., April 5; and Cincinnati, Ohio, May 1.
The major project of the specialist in home economics during the year was home economics in junior and senior high schools.
A series of regional conferences of teachers and supervisors were conducted by the specialist in a number of cities.
The specialist in commercial education conducted 10 regional conferences, the chief results of which have been an increasing number of colleges and universities allowing entrance credits in commercial subjects, and the accumulation of data for use in formulating courses of study for the several regions.
Within the past year the specialist in school legislation made a digest of the enactments of the 42 legislatures in regular session in 1921 and of several special sessions.
During the year the attention of the specialist in foreign educational systems has been centered upon the evaluation of elementary and secondary school credits from abroad in terms of corresponding credits from schools in the United States.
Many inquiries have been received for information on this subject.
There are at present at least 10,000 foreign students in our institutions of higher learning, and probably as many more in secondary schools.
Statisties.
Statistical reports for the year ended June 30, 1920, were completed, excepting those of public high schools.
Two additional clerks are needed so that the work may be finished earlier than is now possible.
Also, the bureau should have some field agents for the collection of some of the reports of complex educational systems and institutions.
Publications.
The usual number of bulletins and leaflets were issued during the year.
Owing to congressional legislation the periodical School Life has not been issued since December, 1921.
It is hoped that publication of it may be resumed in September, 1922.
Library.
An important part of the work carried on under the library division is the work of home education, which was inaugurated in the bureau in 1913, to help parents to further their education at home; to help them in the care and training of their children before they are of school age; to help the boys and girls to further their education after they have left school, etc.
Reading courses containing lists of books prepared by leading specialists in the United States have been issued from time to time.
At present there are 22 courses.
During the past year three new courses have been prepared and issued; and a conference of special collaborators and librarians was called by the Commissioner of Education.
The meeting was held in Lexington, Ky., in cooperation with the National University Extension Association.
Alaska division.
During the year the field force in Alaska included 5 superintendents, 144 teachers, 8 physicians, 14 nurses in training, 16 hospital attendants, and 7 herders in charge of reindeer belonging to the Government.
Seventy schools for natives were in operation with an enrollment of approximately 4,000.
Orphanages were maintained at Kanakanak and Tyonek for the care of children left destitute by the epidemic of influenza which prevailed in these regions.
School buildings were erected at Tundra, Sleetmute, Noorvik, Gambell, and Eek.
During the year the bureau maintained hospitals at Juneau, Kanakanak, Akiak, Nulato, and Noorvik.
Notable extensions to the reindeer service were made.
In compliance with the request for a vessel suitable for use by the Bureau of Education in its Alaskan work, the Navy Department transferred to the Department of the Interior the U. S. S. Boxer, a wooden vessel with a carrying capacity of 500 tons.
Funds to cover the expenses of installing an engine and repairing the vessel were provided in the Interior Department appropriation act, approved May 24, 1922.
Office rooms.
It is earnestly requested that steps be taken to provide immediately more suitable quarters for the bureau.
The quarters in the Pension Building now occupied by the office are not at all suited to its work.
The staff in Washington consists of 87 employees, a large proportion of whom are engaged in important administrative and highly technical work and require a considerable amount of quiet and privacy, such as can not be obtained in the present inadequate quarters.
It has been necessary to place temporarily two sections of this bureau in the court of the Pension Building, which is not a satisfactory place for employees, particularly in cold weather.
Appropriations.
There is urgent need of much larger appropriations for the work of the bureau.
The Federal Government has expended large sums upon the investigation and remedy of diseases of plants and animals, analyzing the soil, and many other things which have greatly promoted the material welfare of the Nation.
Certainly it would be wise to expend something more than the infinitesimal sum the Federal Government now appropriates for the mental and physical welfare of the boys and girls of the Republie.
Would it not be wise and timely to consider at this time a more effective plan of organization of the educational and welfare activities of the Federal Government?
Work of the year.
The work done by the Geological Survey during the year included, as usual, widely varied activities—iņvestigations of ore deposits and mining districts, of present and possible oil and gas fields, of coal fields, and of deposits of other useful minerals; explorations for potash; paleontologic researches; work in geochemistry and geophysics; the compilation of statistics of mineral production; studies of water resources, both surface and underground; land classification; and the continuation of the topographic and geologic mapping of the country.
The work of the Geological Survey in connection with oil continues to be of increasing value, and the application of geology to practical affairs is shown by the fact that in four extensively developed oil fields the geologie mapping had proved the existence of oil-bearing structural features prior to development.
Among the notable publications of the year were the report on the so-called superpower survey, authorized by Congress to determine the practicability of a comprehensive system for generating and distributing power to railroads and industries in the region between Boston and Washington, and Part II of the World Atlas of Commercial Geology, giving a summary of the water powers of the world, developed and undeveloped, with maps.
Work has been done in Pan American countries by geologists and topographers of the Geological Survey on furlough, and a large amount of information on Pan American subjects has been supplied on request to inquirers.
The appropriations for the work of the Geological Survey for the fiscal year 1922 comprised items amounting to $1,754,340.
The number of persons holding appointments from the Secretary at the end of the fiscal year was 877.
Geologic surveys.
During the year geologic surveys were made in 32 States and Alaska.
Studies of ore deposits were made in seven States, and 21 reports on ore deposits or mining districts were prepared or begun.
Surveys to determine the occurrence of oil and gas were made in 13 States, and 32 reports on present or prospective oil or gas fields were prepared or begun.
Coal deposits in three States were examined, and five reports on coal fields were prepared or begun.
Deposits of oil shale in four States were examined.
Comprehensive studies were made on certain rivers in the Southwest to determine the suitability of dam and reservoir sites.
Cooperation in geologic work was continued with eight States, with many Government organizations and scientific institutions, and with the Republie of Haiti.
Surveys in Alaska.
The work of the year in Alaska included 2,280 square miles of geologic surveys and 505 square miles of topographic surveys.
Work in mineral statisties.
Bureau of Census.
Increasing effort is being made to expedite publication of the regular reports by the omission of unessential detail and more efficient methods of compilation.
An outstanding feature of the work during the year was a reduction of the force without appreciable decrease in the service rendered.
Weekly or monthly mimeographed reports were made on fuels and cement, and special timely reports have been issued as conditions demanded.
The compilation of statistics of foreign mineral reserves and production was continued.
A conference of the statisticians in charge of the western offices was held at Washington and will increase the efficiency of the service rendered by those offices to producers and others who seek information on the mineral resources of the West.
Work in chemistry and physics.
Researches relating to geologic processes, analyses of rocks, minerals, ores, and waters, and the identification and study of minerals were continued during the year.
The search for potash in natural salts continued to yield promising results, workable percentages of potash having been found in samples from several wells in Texas.
A new field test for the principal potash mineral so far obtained was devised.
Studies of the porosity of oil sand and of deep earth temperatures were continued.
Topographic surveys.
The new area mapped in the United States during the year was 11,402 square miles, making the total area surveyed to June 30, 1922, 1,218,912 square miles, or 40.2 per cent of the entire country.
In addition 1,487 square miles was resurveyed, and 655 square miles of new area was surveyed in Hawaii.
River surveys amounting to 455 linear miles were also made.
Cooperation in topographic work was furnished by other Government organizations and by 20 States and Hawaii.
The compilation of the United States portion of the international map of the world was continued, and the maps now finished cover 46 States.
The map information office was engaged in indexing and catalogueing the map data available in the Federal departments and in furnishing miscellaneous map information to the public.
Work on water resources.
Stream gauging has been continued in 41 States and Hawaii, more than 11,000 measurements of stream flow having been made during the year.
In this work 31 States and Hawaii have cooperated by contributing $217,010, and several Government bureaus have contributed largely to the study of the flow of particular streams.
At the end of the year 1,540 gauging stations were being maintained, including 77 in Hawaii.
Ground-water investigations have been in progress in 10 States and Hawaii, and in this work five States cooperated.
States Public Health Service in special investigations relating to ground water.
Investigations of the present and probable future use of both surface and ground waters have been made in connection with the classification of public lands, with special reference to their use for power or for agriculture under the laws applicable thereto.
Statistical reports on the production of electricity and consumption of fuel by public-utility power plants have been prepared monthly.
During the year maps were published showing the location of power stations and transmission lines used in public service in 14 States.
The quality of water was investigated by analyses of 671 samples from several States.
Land classification.
During the year reports to be used in the administration of the public-land laws were prepared on more than 25,000 cases referred to the Geological Survey for that purpose.
The work done on the classification and restoration to the publie domain of areas embraced in outstanding mineral-land withdrawals resulted in a net decrease of 459,341 acres in the area previously classified as coal land, a net increase of 268,359 acres in the area classified as phosphate land, and decreases of 3,914,988 acres in outstanding coal reserves, of 110,803 acres in outstanding petroleum reserves.