Since the close of the last Congress the Nation has lost President Harding.
The world knew his kindness and his humanity, his greatness and his character.
He has left his mark upon history.
He has made justice more certain and peace more secure.
The surpassing tribute paid to his memory as he was borne across the continent to rest at last at home revealed the place lie held in the hearts of the American people.
But this is not the occasion for extended reference to the man or his work.
In this presence, among these who knew and loved him, that is unnecessary.
But we who were associated with him could not resume together the functions of our office without pausing for a moment, and in his memory reconsecrating ourselves to the service of our country.
He is gone.
We remain.
It is our duty, under the inspiration of his example, to take up the burdens which he was permitted to lay down, and to develop and support the wise principles of government which he represented.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS For us peace reigns everywhere.
We desire to perpetuate it always by granting full justice to others and requiring of others full justice to ourselves.
Our country has one cardinal principle to maintain in its foreign policy.
It is an American principle.
It must be an American policy.
We attend to our own affairs, conserve our own strength, and protect the interests of our own citizens; but we recognize thoroughly our obligation to help others, reserving to the decision of our own Judgment the time, the place, and the method.
We realize the common bond of humanity.
We know the inescapable law of service.
Our country has definitely refused to adopt and ratify the covenant of the League of Nations.
We have not felt warranted in assuming the responsibilities which its members have assumed.
I am not proposing any change in this policy; neither is the Senate.
The incident, so far as we are concerned, is closed.
The League exists as a foreign agency.
We hope it will be helpful.
But the United States sees no reason to limit its own freedom and independence of action by joining it.
We shall do well to recognize this basic fact in all national affairs and govern ourselves accordingly.
WORLD COURT Our foreign policy has always been guided by two principles.
The one is the avoidance of permanent political alliances which would sacrifice our proper independence.
The other is the peaceful settlement of controversies between nations.
By example and by treaty we have advocated arbitration.
For nearly 25 years we have been a member of The Hague Tribunal, and have long sought the creation of a permanent World Court of Justice.
I am in full accord with both of these policies.
I favor the establishment of such a court intended to include the whole world.
That is, and has long been, an American policy.
Pending before the Senate is a proposal that this Government give its support to the Permanent Court of International Justice, which is a new and somewhat different plan.
This is not a partisan question.
It should not assume an artificial importance.
The court is merely a convenient instrument of adjustment to which we could go, but to which we could not be brought.
It should be discussed with entire candor, not by a political but by a judicial method, without pressure and without prejudice.
Partisanship has no place in our foreign relations.
As I wish to see a court established, and as the proposal presents the only practical plan on which many nations have ever agreed, though it may not meet every desire, I therefore commend it to the favorable consideration of the Senate, with the proposed reservations clearly indicating our refusal to adhere to the League of Nations.
RUSSIA Our diplomatic relations, lately so largely interrupted, are now being resumed, but Russia presents notable difficulties.
We have every desire to see that great people, who are our traditional friends, restored to their position among the nations of the earth.
We have relieved their pitiable destitution with an.
enormous charity.
Our Government offers no objection to the carrying on of commerce by our citizens with the people of Russia.
Our Government does not propose, however, to enter into relations with another regime which refuses to recognize the sanctity of international obligations.
I do not propose to barter away for the privilege of trade any of the cherished rights of humanity.
I do not propose to make merchandise of any American principles.
These rights and principles must go wherever the sanctions of our Government go.
But while the favor of America is not for sale, I am willing to make very large concessions for the purpose of rescuing the people of Russia.
Already encouraging evidences of returning to the ancient ways of society can be detected.
But more are needed.
Whenever there appears any disposition to compensate our citizens who were despoiled, and to recognize that debt contracted with our Government, not by the Czar, but by the newly formed Republic of Russia; whenever the active spirit of enmity to our institutions is abated; whenever there appear works mete for repentance; our country ought to be the first to go to the economic and moral rescue of Russia.
We have every desire to help and no desire to injure.
We hope the time is near at hand when we can act.
DEBTS The current debt and interest due from foreign Governments, exclusive of the British debt of $4,600,000,000, is about $7,200,000,000.
I do not favor the cancellation of this debt, but I see no objection to adjusting it in accordance with the principle adopted for the British debt.
Our country would not wish to assume the role of an oppressive creditor, but would maintain the principle that financial obligations between nations are likewise moral obligations which international faith and honor require should be discharged.
Our Government has a liquidated claim against Germany for the expense of the army of occupation of over $255,000,000.
Besides this, the Mixed Claims Commission have before them about 12,500 claims of American citizens, aggregating about $1,225,000,000.
These claims have already been reduced by a recent decision, but there are valid claims reaching well toward $500,000,000.
Our thousands of citizens with credits due them of hundreds of millions of dollars have no redress save in the action of our Government.
These are very substantial interests, which it is the duty of our Government to protect as best it can.
That course I propose to pursue.
It is for these reasons that we have a direct interest in the economic recovery of Europe.
They are enlarged by our desire for the stability of civilization and the welfare of humanity.
That we are making sacrifices to that end none can deny.
Our deferred interest alone amounts to a million dollars every day.
But recently we offered to aid with our advice and counsel.
We have reiterated our desire to see France paid and Germany revived.
We have proposed disarmament.
We have earnestly sought to compose differences and restore peace.
We shall persevere in well-doing, not by force, but by reason.
FOREIGN PAPERS Under the law the papers pertaining to foreign relations to be printed are transmitted as a part of this message.
Other volumes of these papers will follow.
FOREIGN SERVICE The foreign service of our Government needs to be reorganized and improved.
FISCAL CONDITION Our main problems are domestic problems.
Financial stability is the first requisite of sound government.
We can not escape the effect of world conditions.
We can not avoid the inevitable results of the economic disorders which have reached all nations.
But we shall diminish their harm to us in proportion as we continue to restore our Government finances to a secure and endurable position.
This we can and must do.
Upon that firm foundation rests the only hope of progress and prosperity.
From that source must come relief for the people.
This is being, accomplished by a drastic but orderly retrenchment, which is bringing our expenses within our means.
The origin of this has been the determination of the American people, the main support has been the courage of those in authority, and the effective method has been the Budget System.
The result has involved real sacrifice by department heads, but it has been made without flinching.
This system is a law of the Congress.
It represents your will.
It must be maintained, and ought to be strengthened by the example of your observance.
Without a Budget System there can be no fixed responsibility and no constructive scientific economy.
This great concentration of effort by the administration and Congress has brought the expenditures, exclusive of the self-supporting Post.
Office Department, down to three billion dollars.
It is possible, in consequence, to make a large reduction in the taxes of the people, which is the sole object of all curtailment.
This is treated at greater length in the Budget message, and a proposed plan has been presented in detail in a statement by the Secretary of the Treasury which has my unqualified approval.
I especially commend a decrease on earned incomes, and further abolition of admission, message, and nuisance taxes.
Tile amusement and educational value of moving pictures ought not to be taxed.
Diminishing charges against moderate incomes from investment will afford immense relief, while a revision of the surtaxes will not only provide additional money for capital investment, thus stimulating industry and employing more but will not greatly reduce the revenue from that source, and may in the future actually increase it.
Being opposed to war taxes in time of peace, I am not in favor of excess-profits taxes.
A very great service could be rendered through immediate enactment of legislation relieving the people of some of the burden of taxation.
To' reduce war taxes is to give every home a better chance.
For seven years the people have borne with uncomplaining courage the tremendous burden of national and local taxation.
These must both be reduced.
The taxes of the Nation must be reduced now as much as prudence will permit, and expenditures must be reduced accordingly.
High taxes reach everywhere and burden everybody.
They gear most heavily upon the poor.
They diminish industry and commerce.
They make agriculture unprofitable.
They increase the rates on transportation.
They are a charge on every necessary of life.
Of all services which the Congress can render to the country, I have no hesitation in declaring to neglect it, to postpone it, to obstruct it by unsound proposals, is to become unworthy of public confidence and untrue to public trust.
The country wants this measure to have the right of way over an others.
Another reform which is urgent in our fiscal system is the abolition of the right to issue tax-exempt securities.
The existing system not only permits a large amount of the wealth of the Nation to escape its just burden but acts as a continual stimulant to municipal extravagance.
This should be prohibited by constitutional amendment.
All the wealth of the Nation ought to contribute its fair share to the expenses of the Nation.
TARIFF LAW The present tariff law has accomplished its two main objects.
It has secured an abundant revenue and been productive of an abounding prosperity.
Under it the country has had a very large export and import trade.
A constant revision of the tariff by the Congress is disturbing and harmful.
The present law contains an elastic provision authorizing the President to increase or decrease present schedules not in excess of 50 per centum to meet the difference in cost of production at home and abroad.
This does not, to my mind, warrant a rewriting of the whole law, but does mean, and will be so administered, that whenever the required investigation shows that inequalities of sufficient importance exist in any schedule, the power to change them should and will be applied.
SHIPPING The entire well being of our country is dependent upon transportation by sea and land.
Our Government during the war acquired a large merchant fleet which should be transferred, as soon as possible, to private ownership and operation under conditions which would secure two results: First, and of prime importance, adequate means for national defense; second, adequate service to American commerce.
Until shipping conditions are such that our fleet can be disposed of advantageously under these conditions, it will be operated as economically as possible under such plans as may be devised from time to time by the Shipping Board.
We must have a merchant marine which meets these requirements, and we shall have to pay the cost of its service.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS The time has come to resume in a moderate way the opening of our intracoastal waterways; the control of flood waters of the Mississippi and of the Colorado Rivers; the improvement of the waterways from the Great Lakes toward the Gulf of Mexico; and the development of the great power and navigation project of the St. Lawrence River, for which efforts are now being made to secure the necessary treaty with Canada.
These projects can not all be undertaken at once, but all should have the immediate consideration of the Congress and be adopted as fast as plans can be matured and the necessary funds become available.
This is not incompatible with economy, for their nature does not require so much a public expenditure as a capital investment which will be reproductive, as evidenced by the marked increase in revenue from the Panama Canal.
Upon these projects depend much future industrial and agricultural progress.
They represent the protection of large areas from flood and the addition of a great amount of cheap power and cheap freight by use of navigation, chief of which is the bringing of ocean-going ships to the Great Lakes.
Another problem of allied character is the superpower development of the Northeastern States, consideration of which is growing under the direction of the Department of Commerce by joint conference with the local authorities.
RAILROADS Criticism of the railroad law has been directed, first, to the section laying down the rule by which rates are fixed, and providing for payment to the Government and use of excess earnings; second, to the method for the adjustment of wage scales; and third, to the authority permitting consolidations.
It has been erroneously assumed that the act undertakes to guarantee railroad earnings.
The law requires that rates should be just and reasonable.
That has always been the rule under which rates have been fixed.
To make a rate that does not yield a fair return results in confiscation, and confiscatory rates are of course unconstitutional.
Unless the Government adheres to the rule of making a rate that will yield a fair return, it must abandon rate making altogether.
The new and important feature of that part of the law is the recapture and redistribution of excess rates.
