Washington, November 20, 1924.
Sir: In accordance with the policy of your administration, rigid economy has been stressed in operating the Department of the Interior through its 14 bureaus and establishments.
The appropriations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1924, were $325,872,078.
For the fiscal year ending June 30, 1925, they are $290,473,724.06, or a saving of $35,398,353.95 over the previous year.
The appropriations asked for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1926, are $267,785,596.17, or $22,688,127.89 under 1925, and approximately $83,000,000 under 1922.
These savings were made without impairment of service rendered to the public by this department, abundant proof in itself that efficiency and economy are inseparable.
Each-is necessary to the other.
Each bureau of this department was found, two years ago, to be operating as an independent unit of Government, with complete divisions, some of them duplicating functions of others.
There were duplicated law officers, boards of appeal, disbursing officers, and libraries.
The books in the department's law libraries, in duplicate and triplicate, numbered 24,122.
There were separate units handling business relating to health, education, irrigation, oil and gas, publications, purchases and supplies, accounting and auditing, contracts, engineering, drafting, editing, motor vehicles, mimeographing and multigraphing, personnel, inspection, property accounting, map making, photographing, addressographing, photostating, and traffic.
Progress toward coordinating activities has been made during the fiscal year, but much of the duplication is compelled by specific legislation or appropriation, leaving little administrative optión in merging similar activities or shifting them from one bureau to another in the same department.
There must be more latitude allowed by law in the administration of the department's bureaus to insure the highest efficiency.
There are two avenues of administration open to a Secretary of the Interior-by bureaus or through bureaus.
The one offering least resistance is for the Secretary to consent to an independent administration of unrelated activities by its bureaus, independent of a covering policy.
The other alternative requires the active working interest of the Secretary in bureau and departmental coordination.
Bringing bureau chiefs into departments from the business world by presidential appointment is the safeguard of civil service efficiency.
It joins the public's necessities, which the Government serves, to the technical routine of the service, which experience has taught to civil service employees who necessarily have been excluded and secluded from the business world and its methods.
But it is not possible for the head of a bureau to reorganize it alone.
His exacting daily duties and the conscientious objections of emplovees to change of methods with which they have grown familiar, compel the Secretary to join with him and invite in men actiye in the ultimate application of bureau rulings in business, to coordinate the Government's activities with the business world.
The results of this policy employed during the past two years in the Interior Department have amply justified the practice, and the disposition of active men in business to assist cheerfully without compensation is a grateful reassurance to the Government.
A problem of great concern to the Secretary of the Interior is the Government's responsibilities to the Indian, because of the human relations involved.
There are approximately 225,000 Indians under Federal guardianship.
Public interest has been enlisted in the Indian question as never before, and it is believed to good purpose.
The public has been taken into the confidence of the Indian Bureau and its advices have been sought.
An advisory council of 100 citizens of national prominence was organized and assembled for the purpose of surveying and discussing in convention the conditions of these aboriginal Americans.
Sixty of those invited came to Washington last December at their own expense for a conference, the first of its kind ever held.
It was an epoch in the history of the Government's effort to conserve the Indian.
Constructive recommendations dealing with the education, health, and sanitation; leasing of executive-order reservations; pay of bureau employees; dances and ceremonies; and other subjects intended to bring the Indian into the fullness of Caucasian civilization were adopted by this council at its conference.
Some of these recommendations were found to have been already adopted by the present commissioner, and many others were put into effect within a period of six months.
During the session of the Sixty-eighth Congress 44 different bills beneficial to Indians became law, the greatest number in any single session of Congress and one-sixth of the total legislation of the last Congress.
Centralized authority with decentralized responsibility, the fundamental of effective administration, is essential in the Indian Service because of the distance between the bureau in Washington and its wards.
States should be impressed that ultimately the Indian problem is theirs to solve, and the Government's participation should eventually be cooperative rather than initiative in character.
The Indian Bureau is trying to elicit public interest in the States to work with it.
Decentralization applied to the Indian Bureau would be conscientiously resisted behind the refuge of"It can not be done that way." or"We have always done it this way."
Precedent may be good or bad, may lend itself to evolution or to involution, but new precedents must be established for new visions.
The Indian Bureau pays into States $42,000,000 annually, onethird through channels of administration and two-thirds to Indians directly.
States and the Federal Government should cooperate in seeing that these vast sums are expended in permanencies for community betterments, to be contributed to, owned, and fostered by Indians themselves.
States should interest themselves in the affairs of the Indian.
The State governments now have agencies similar to those maintained by the Indian Bureau to assume these responsibilities over restricted Indians.
Their State boards of health, departments of education and agriculture, boards of charities and welfare are already performing similar functions for their white population to which could be added the Indian population.
The Indian Bureau could then confine itself to administering treaty rights, land titles, collection and disbursement of Indian funds, and the rights and property of the Indians.
In my last annual report attention was called to the need of a comprehensive survey of conditions in the Patent Office.
Although the force of employees has been increased on two occasions by Congress within recent years, the Patent Office is still in arrears.
An application for a patent filed to-day may not be acted upon during the next six months.
For the purpose of simplifying the methods of procedure and expediting business in the Patent Office a special committee consisting of leading representatives of patent bar associations throughout the country, industrial organizations, and the engineering profession has been organized.
The Commissioner of Patents is an ex-officio member of the committee.
Mr. Jo.
Bailey Brown, of Pittsburgh, Pa., one of the patent advisers representing the United States at the Paris Peace Conference.
Mr. A. J. Brousseaú, of New York City, a prominent automobile manufacturer, nominated by the Chamber of Commerce of the United States.
Hon.
Thomas Ewing, of New York City, formerly Commissioner of Patents, nominated by the New York Patent Law Association.
Col. Harry Frease, of Canton, Ohio, formerly president of the Cleveland Patent Law Association, nominated by that association.
Mr. Henry M. Huxley, of Chicago, Ill., secretary of the Chieago Patent Law Association, nominated by that association.
Mr. Eugene G. Mason, of Washington, D. C., formerly secretary of the patent section of the American Bar Association, probably the largest association of its kind in the world, nominated by Seeretary of State Hughes, as president of that association.
Mr. George A. Prevost, of Washington, D. C., vice president of the American Patent Law Association, the national association of patent lawyers having members in 53 American cities.
Prindle, of New York City, formerly secretary of the patent committee of the National Research Council, nominated by the National Association of Manufacturers.
Mr. Milton Tibbetts, of Detroit, Mich., assistant secretary of the Packard Motor Car Co., and formerly president of the Michigan Patent Law Associaiton, nominated by that association.
Mr. L. W. Wallace, of Washington, D. C., executive secretary of the American Engineering Couneil, consisting of 29 engineering societies, which represents almost 40,000 engineers.
This committee is at work.
The serviees of its members are being rendered without remuneration in the interest of publie service.
Every possible aid and assistance is being given the committee toward facilitating the study of the various functions of the Patent Office by the commissioner and employees.
Its findings and recommendations will be submitted to the President.
Any necessary steps will be taken to expedite the important business of this bureau.
In the administration of the General Land Office during the year the commissioner effected a saving of approximately $85,000 in the operating routine of the bureau in Washington.
A study of the land laws and regulations governing the disposition of the publie domain is being made by a special committee in the department under his direction.
No comprehensive study of this bureau appears to have been made for 100 years.
It is probable that growth of the country and changed conditons will warrant some radical departures from established custom.
The approximate acreage of the unreserved public lands, exclusive of the Territory of Alaska, now in possession of the Government, is 186,000,000 acres.
This area represents what is left after 100 years or more of selection by hundreds of thousands of pioneers emigrating to the West to make homes.
Some of the land is arid and semiarid, requiring irrigation; other portions are situated on steep mountain slopes which have never been surveyed.
In general, the soil is stony or sandy and most of it is unproductive.
Agricultural development is so expensive and burdensome that a living for a family may not be secured from the average homestead tract.
During the past year 3,365,000 acres of this class of public land have been thrown open by the General Land Office to homestead entry, with ex-service men having the preference right, under practically the same land laws and regulations that wére in force in the past when the most fertile areas of public land were opened to entry.
The question arises, therefore, whether the Government should continue this method of disposing of its public domain without modification of these antiquated laws and regulations.Considering the limited agricultural fertility of the land now comprising the public domain and the demonstrated inability of the average settler to successfully homestead, because of insurmountable natural difficulties, it would appear that Congress should take cognizance of the end results of homesteading the remaining public lands.
The present law covering the acquisition of timber and stone lands on the public domain, passed in 1878, should be revised to better protect our vanishing timber in the public interest.
Through a reorganization of the Washington office of the Bureau of Reclamation during the past fiscal year 33 positions were declared surplus, which, together with other economies in administration, have resulted in savings of approximately $100,000.
Since my last annual report the special advisory committee on reclamation completed its work.
The personnel of this committee consisted of Hon.
Thomas E. Campbell, of Arizona; Dr. Elwood Mead, of California; Mr. Oscar E. Bradfute, of Ohio; Dr. John A. Widtsoe, of Utah; Hon.
Clyde C. Dawson, of Colorado; and Hon.
James R. Garfield, of Ohio.
Their report was forwarded to the President and by him to Congress.
The survey extended over a period of seven months.
It was the most exhaustive and far-reaching study of Federal reclamation ever undertaken.
It has received the approval of those familiar with reclamation by irrigation.
A painstaking and detailed study was made of the history of every project constructed by the Government.
The original estimates of the engineers on the costs of irrigation works of each project were analyzed and compared with the actual costs, after construction was completed.
Expenses of preparing the lands for cultivation, selective settlement of projects, the proper size of farm units, drainage to restore waterlogged lands, agricultural development, financing the farmer, transportation facilities, freight rates, climatic conditions and other important features of reclamation upon which the success or failure of reclamation depends, were investigated.
The report of the special advisers, printed as a public document during the fiscal year, was an admirable treatise on Federal reclamation.
It is a text for the guidance of coming generations.
A most important finding was the necessity for a change in the present method of repayment by the farmers of the costs of constructing the projects.
Under existing laws an arbitrary amount is fixed to be paid in twenty annual instalments regardless of soil fertility.
Pointing out that this system is erroneous and unscientifie in principle, the committee proposed that repayments should be made on a percentage basis according to the productivity of the lands.
In other words, crops raised on each project should determine the annual assessment of the Government to cover construction cost rather than an amount fixed by law, regardless of the land's fertility.
The committee recommended 5 per cent of the producing value of the land as the annual repayment charge.
The special advisory committee made 66 specific recommendations in all, covering many other phases of reclamation.
A method of bringing about permanent relief from the distressing conditions existing among the farmers was also proposed through a complete reclassification of reclaimed lands.
On some of the projects it was found that farms occupied by settlers were incapable of producing crops.
On others it was revealed that some farms were more fertile than others, producing larger and more profitable erops.
Yet, according to the terms of the reclamation law, the annual charge levied by the Government against each farm is proportionately the same.
In order to correct this apparent injustice the committee recommended that farms be classified into groups according to productivity and the charges adjusted accordingly.
Farmers occupying unproductive lands should be given an opportunity to exchange them for others.
Farm units incapable of supporting a farmer and his family and repaying construction costs due the Government should be exempt from the repayment requirements until their productivity is developed.
Financial assistance to the settlers to enable them to obtain capital with which to buy agricultural equipment was recommended through the creation of a credit fund by the Government.
In a special message to the Sixty-eighth Congress, the President urged that the legislation suggested by the special advisory committee be enacted into law, pointing out that a definite policy is imperative.
This legislation failed in the last hour of the last session of Congress.
In my opinion the future of Federal reclamatión depends on the prompt enactment of this legislation at the coming session.
Public approval of this measure since Congress adjourned would justify its prompt passage.
The growing popularity of the national park system is evidenced by the steady annual increase in travel.
In the 1924 season there were 1,422,353 visitors to the national parks and 248,555 visitors to the national monuments under the jurisdiction of this department, a total of 1,670,908 visitors, compared with a total of 1,493,712 during the calendar year 1923.
The revenues from the operation of the national parks amounted to $663,886.32 for the present year, as against $513,706.36 for 1923, a gain of $150,179.96.
Additional areas in the East within comparatively easy access to the inhabitants of our crowded urban centers should be secured and dedicated to national park purposes.
Public interest has developed during the past year in the proposal for the establishment of a national park in some typically scenic area of the East.
So far the Western States have virtually had a monopoly on national parks, the only one in eastern United States being Lafavette National Park, in the State of Maine.
The more populous East should be provided with an accessible national park.
North and south, east and west overland travel is developing rapidly, the Southern Appalachian Mountain regions contain scenic areas suitable for such purposes, and a national park in this section would afford an attractive outdoor, recreational opportunity of interest to vacationists.
In order to discover the most suitable location a committee of five public-spirited citizens, appointed during the fiscal year, has been conducting an extensive study of the southern Appalachian region, inspecting many of the proposed sites.
The committee consists of H. W. Temple, chairman, and Congressman from Pennsylvania; W. A. Welsh, general manager of the Palisades Interstate Park, New York; Harlan P. Kelsey, representing the Appalachian Mountain Club; William C. Gregg, representing the National Arts Club, New York; and Glenn S. Smith, Geological Survey, secretary.
When this committee completes its inquiry a definite decision will be made as to the most available scenic area where a new national park may be established in the East.
It is hoped that Congress will see fit to create an outdoor playground, readily accessible to the millions of people from the densely populated centers of the East.
The outstanding features of the Bureau of Mines' efforts during the past vear to increase safety in mining have been: (1) The development of close cooperation with the British mines department, whereby the results of British experiments and research directed toward greater safety in mining will be available to American engineers and the results of Bureau of Mines studies will be available to the English.
This will, in effect, double the research possibilities of both countries without increasing the cost.
2) An intensive campaign for the adoption of rockdusting as a means of preventing disastrous explosions in bituminous coal mines.
The Utah Industrial Accident Commission has included this method in its regulations and other States have taken steps to advance its use.
3) An intensive study of coal mining hazards, with special reference to further research on the safe use of electricity in mines.
Helium, a noninflammable gas, is attracting attention.
At the request of the War and Navy Departments and with moneys allotted by them, the technical staff of the Bureau of Mines has been of assistance in the production of helium.
A representative of the bureau sits with the Army and Navy helium board, and every effort has been made to cooperate to the fullest extent with these departments in locating and conserving this necessary element of defense.
The production of oil from the public lands, exclusive of the naval petroleum reserves, amounted to nearly 40,000,000 barrels, from which the Government obtained nearly 8,000,000 barrels of royalty oil, valued at slightly more than $12,000,000.
Of this sum, 90 per cent was returned to the States, either directly or through the Reclamation Service, and the remaining 10 per cent went to the Federal Treasury to cover the cost of supervision.
The actual cost is about one-third this amount, the remainder being available for general expenses of the Government.
Supervising the production and gauging of the 40,000,000 barrels cost the Government only $250,000.
The formation of a permanent Federal oil commission, to include the Secretaries of War, Navy, Interior, and Commerce, to study the conservation of our oil deposits and more thorough and economical methods of recapture, to be comprehended in a national continuing oil policy, is an urgent necessity in the interests of the public.
The Geological Survey has been of great assistance to bureaus of the Interior Department and to Federal and State Governments.
Their survey and investigation of mineral resources in Alaska was effectively prosecuted during the year and promises invaluable data on the resources of that Territory.
The geologic and topographic survey of naval petroleum reserve No. 4, in northern Alaska, was carried well toward completion during the fiscal year by engineers of the survey.
This bureau completed a survey of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado in October, 1923, an extra hazardous but successful expedition.
Twenty-one States have cooperated with the bureau in topographic map making during the fiscal year, contributing onehalf or more of the cost of the work within their borders.
Its study of mineral and water resources and the classification of public lands has furnished valuable data concerning the natural resources of the country.
In fact, during the fiscal year just closed the Geological Survey has reached its highest development to date.
A reorganization of the Pension Bureau was completed early in the calendar year 1923.
The annual operating expenses of this bureau have been reduced by $266,000.
Over $56,500 was returned to the Treasury as unused balance of an appropriation for temporary employees.
The estimated saving to pensioners by abolishing the old voucher system and substituting direct payments to the pensioners by check exceeds $200,000.
Employees of the Pension Bureau state that this reorganization has increased efficiency and expedited the business, notwithstanding the elimination of 338 positions.
Because the advanced age of all Civil War veterans has contributed to their infirmities, more liberal construction of technicalities in appraising physical disabilities has been urged on our pension examining boards.
Alaska.
It is important for the more economical and effective administration of Territorial affairs that the Government's activities in Alaska and in Hawaii be covered into one department and under one secretary in your Cabinet.
A multiplication of Government bureaus reporting to separate departments cumbers administration by contributing to duplication of effort, overlapping of functions, and extravagance in expenditures, but the coordination of allied activities would avoid lost motion and confusion.
In Alaska every department of government now has responsibilities.
Government's employ.
The aggregate total expenditures of government for a Territory having 30,000 whites and a less number of natives is unnecessarily large.
The Alaska Railroad has been under inspection and reorganization during the past year.
Noel W. Smith, an expert in railroad construction and operation, has been loaned to us by Gen. W. W. Atterbury, of the Pennsylvania Railroad, and has been in Alaska working on this problem since August 1.
No complete survey of the physical condition of this road or the commercial possibilities of the territory tributary to it has heretofore been made.
It is believed that a comprehensive report will soon be available for Congress and for future guidance in operating this Government-owned railroad.
Hawaii.
With its strategie position in the Pacific, Hawaii gives more than passing interest and importance to the character of its population.
Governor Farrington, of the Territory, reports "good progress made under the Hawaiian homes law of 1920 in attracting citizens of native Hawaiian ancestry to make their homes in the agricultural distriets and engage in diversified farming; that some adjustment between Federal and Territorial authority is desirable in the issuance of birth certificates to American-born children of oriental ancestry resident in the Territory."
Because it is the strategic commercial center of the Pacific, Hawaii must have adequate harbors.
This development is proceeding with excellent cooperation between Federal and Territorial departments, but at best is hardly keeping pace with the rapid increase of trans-Pacific trade in which American ships are participating each year in growing numbers.
This harbor work dovetails into the scheme of national defense and should not be neglected.
It also serves the rapidly increasing numbers of travelers visiting the Hawaii National Park and the many other points of interest and beauty throughout the islands.
There is hardly a department of the Federal Government that does not have a vital interest in the strategic national values of this outpost.
The Territory is partieipating in Federal aid for highways, education, and child welfare under authorization given by the Sixtyeighth Congress.
It now asks that its publie-school teachers be relieved of paying Federal income tax, since this tax burden is not placed upon the public-sehool teachers of any State in the Union.
Apparently, through some misunderstanding when the law was framed, the school-teachers of Hawaii pay into the Federal Treasury an income tax total of $40,000 annually.
General prosperity in the Territory is the natural and gratifying result of a year in which a record tonnage of sugar and a record pack of canned pineapples have been sold at prices yielding a fair profit.
The savings-bank deposits are higher than ever before.
Government responsibilities in construction, now scattered through the different Federal departments, have reached such magnitude that they need to be organized and coordinated.
This should be aecomplished by bringing them together under a single control through the creation of a bureau of publie works, constituted under the Department of the Interior.
The establishment of such a bureau would create a coordinated governmental industrial organization, efficient and economical in times of peace, ready in time of war or emergency, to bring instantly into action the whole unified engineering and public works functions of the Government.
It would render even more efficient the present Budget system, with standardized and simplified specifications and contract forms, coordinated estimates, and unified control of governmental construetion activities.
It would enable the governmental service to attract and hold the highest type of technically trained men by offering more permanent and attractive work and ample seope for the exercise of technical and administrative ability.
The personnel for such a technical bureau could readily be assembled from the different departments of Government to create this essential instrument of administration.
The Commissioner of Education has reorganized our educational system for the natives of Alaska, and incidentally purchased the necessary supplies for the fiscal year in connection therewith for approximately'one-third less than was paid for their equivalent during the previous year.
The purely academic curriculum heretofore offered has failed to preserve the native crafts of the Alaskan Indian, such as weaving, carving, and other kinds of handwork.
Clearly the type of education which should be applied to the native is that which will enable him to better earn a livelihood and at the same time preserve the trades and limited industries handed down to him from his ancestors.
Three industrial schools are under construction, and a new course of study is being worked out with this policy in mind.
War mineral relief has been expedited.
On May 1, 1923, a commission for handling these claims was abolished and the work of settling claims transferred to the solicitor's office of the department.
The monthly pay roll at that time amounted to $3,033, with 13 employees.
At the present time this force has been reduced to one commissioner, two accountants, and one clerk, with a pay roll of $1,255 monthly.
On May 1, 1923, there were 537 claims unsettled.
Now there are 36 pending.
The work of settling these claims would have long since been completed except for a decision of the court of appeals to the effect that the purchase price of real property and interest on borrowed capital should be considered as part of losses in liquidating claims.
This decision has been taken to the Supreme Court of the United States.
Should this tribunal reverse the holdings of the lower court the few remaining claims will be the subject of almost immediate disposition ending the war minerals relief work of the Government.
A committee on departmental publications was formed last year.
With the cooperation of bureaus, 1,071,186 publications were eliminated and congestion of publications in the office of the Superintendent of Documents was relieved.
Of this number 532,225 were found to be of value and in demand, which were turned over to the Superintendent of Documents for sale to the public, and 538,961 were turned over to him to be destroyed and sold as waste paper.
The general practice of keeping publications intended for free distribution for a longer period than one year has been discontinued with a few exceptions.
Publications which remain on hand at the end of each fiscal year will hereafter be turned over to the Superintendent of Documents annually for sale or other disposition by him.
This plan not only provides an annual source of revenue, but conserves valuable storage space.
The number of Interior Department publications, maps, and extra copies of patents sold during the fiscal year 1923 amounted to 4,307,645, the value of which was $375,049.38.
Under the direction of the Interior Department, but dissociated from its Bureau of Education, are the Howard University, the Freedmen's Hospital, both for the colored race, the St. Elizabeths Hospital for insane soldiers and sailors, which includes training schools for nurses, for vocational training, and short courses for physicians.
Each institution is educational, wholly or in part, and each is functioning at the highest point of efficiency in its history.
ET Wok, Secretary.
1. Eliminated through intense application of work, approximately 57 employees, reducing annual pay roll about $60,000.
2. Delivered patents on public lands to homesteaders within from 30 to 60 days from date of final receipt of certificate at General Land Office.
3. Sold at public auction strip of publie land known as the Harding town site in close proximity to Miami Beach, Fla., for approximately $386,000, the highest price ever received for a Government township.
4. Leased 1,840 acres of public coal land in Alabama at public auction, receiving bonus of $85,000, one of the largest ever received by the Government.
5. Entered and allowed during the fiscal year publie and Indian lands, 4,564,412 acres; a decrease of 1,850,590 acres as compared with the year previous.
6. Patented during the year 8,826,039 acres, a decrease of 569,777 as against the year previous.
7. Collected from all sources during the year an aggregate of $16,373,004.04, of which sum, after the deposit in the Treasury of the United States of the receipts for the benefit of special funds, there was turned over to the Treasury for the credit of its general fund the sum of $2,857,220.34.
8. Collected and deposited in the Treasury of the United States as the result of the work of the field service $67,835.29.
9. Restored to the public domain as the result of investigations in the field 170,400 acres.
10. Investigated in the field and reported upon 13,680 cases.
11. Conducted 286 hearings in Government contests.
12. Obtained 27 convictions in criminal cases prosecuted during the year.
14. Entered of record 271,710 tract-book notations.
15. Patented under the homestead law 5,530,780 acres, a decrease of 779,149 acres as compared with 1923.
16. Entered and allowed during the year 2,812,624 acres under the stock raising homestead law.
18. Approved for patent 984 certificates of town-lot sales.
19. Patented 86 cash entries and 28 final homesteads, under the Minnesota and Arkansas drainage acts, involving 17,240 acres; patented under these acts since their passage 1,048,000 acres.
20. Canceled upon relinquishment or judicial forfeiture 208 grants of right of way.
21. Disposed of by allowance or otherwise 236 applications for stock-watering reservoirs.
22. Received for action one application for recognition as a State irrigation district, involving 10,427 acres; since the date of the act 13 distriets have been recognized involving an area of 1,128,393 acres.
23. Considered favorably 18 reports on private irrigation projects, involving 131 desert-land entries and applications.
24. Collected for the use of publie lands in connection with hydroelectric power development $6,957.82.
25. Received for action 1,300“elections” under section 24 of the Federal water power act.
26. Patented under the Carey Aet 67,700 acres.
27. Issued 214 permits for the development of underground water in Nevada.
28. Approved for patent 712 final desert entries.
29. Approved for patent 304 reclamation homestead entries.
30. Secured the withdrawal for reclamation purposes of 118,440 acres and restored 129,640 aeres theretofore withdrawn for such purpose.
31. Opened to entry under the reclamation aet 76 farm units, aggregating 7,080 acres.
32. Opened to entry 9,404 acres of ceded Chippewa “eut-over ” lands in Minnesota.
33. Secured the withdrawal and reservation for various publie purposes of 3,594,055 acres of publie lands, and restored to entry 3,551,530 acres theretofore withdrawn.
34. Restored 12“ shore spaces” abutting upon navigable waters in Alaska.
35. Restored and opened to entry 2,703,704 aeres subjeet to the preference right of entry by ex-service men.
36. Patented under the swamp-land grant 33,821 acres.
58. Received from bonuses, royalties, and rentals under the mineral leasing act $13,631,840.72.
60. Allowed 1,764 claims for repayment under statutory authority aggregating $99,896.42.
1. As a result of a survey the number of employees of the Indian Office was reduced by 23, with annual savings of $28,000.
2. A ruling forbidding aliens and alien companies to obtain oil and gas leases on restricted allotted Indian lands was reversed.
3. During the fiscal year special effort was made to enroll children afflicted with trachoma in school, where facilities for treatment are better, and, following an extended medical survey, a trachoma campaign was organized for the ensuing year to cover the States of Arizona and New Mexico.
This will include the urgent needs of the Navajos and will have the cooperation of the local health and Red Cross organizations and the United States Public Health Service.
4. Arrangements were begun for a new sanatorium at Onigum, Minn., a new hospital at the Chilocco School, Oklahoma, and the conversion of the abandoned Shawnee boarding school, Oklahoma, into a sanatorium.
5. Plans were completed for a division of field welfare, to be conducted by a supervisor of field nurses and field matrons, which will coordinate and strengthen this work throughout the service.
6. Attendance in Government schools was maintained to their full capacity, except as prevented by epidemics, but the school term was slightly shortened owing to insufficient appropriations for equipment and maintenance.
7. Public-school attendance by Indian children has steadily increased, calling for an unusually large expenditure for tuition, but the results are satisfactory as to training and reduced cost of education to the Government.
8. Twenty boarding schools conducted summer sessions of from four to six weeks for retarded pupils, and 700 of this class attended, 80 per cent making their grades and promotions, thus saving the expense of another year's schooling, which would have amounted to about $100,000.
9. Under the present poliey of requiring all instructors to attend a session of training school every other summer, this self-improvement attendance has increased in three years from 25 to 325.
10. The need is suggested for continuous sessions of boarding schools accessible to the Navajos, for whom day schools are impracticable, so that their children, some of whom must help with the sheep in all seasons, can all have school privileges for at least a part of the year.
11. A conference of all school supervisors in Washington at the beginning of the year covered many subjects of school improvement and established eloser cooperation between the office and field service.
12. Junior Red Cross societies were organized in nearly all Indian schools and have awakened great interest along lines of educational value.
13. On 15 reservations, 642 allotments of land were made to individual Indians, embracing about 170,000 acres, besides 103 allotments on the public domain covering 14,500 acres.
Of allotments completed and waiting approval, 1,171 were to Indians on the Fort Belknap Reservation, Mont., 91 on the Kalispell Reservation, Wash., and for 180 Ute and Paiute Indians in Utah.
14. Purchase was made of 190 acres for homeless Indians in California; also 800 acres to supply home sites for 11 Fort Sill Apaches, Oklahoma.
15. Sales were made of 1,286 allotted tracts totaling 125,099 aeres, and 913 fee patents and competency certificates covering 106,199 acres were approved.
16. Important progress was made in the Supreme Court of the United States for the recovery of swamp and overflowed lands in the States of Wisconsin and Minnesota.
17. Official reports show a year of encouraging progress in farming and stockraising, a larger acreage cultivated, improvement in dairy stock and Navajo sheep, and elimination of worthless horses in several reservations.
18. Club work for boys and girls had a remarkable growth on 17 reservations, with over 400 children from 9 to 14 years of age enrolled.
Their activities relate to gardening, canning, bread making, sewing, poultry, and much other domestic work.
19. Special encouragement was given to Indians to take part in county, district, and State fairs in competition with the whites and promising results have followed.
20. Road and bridge work was greatly advanced on seven reservations last year.
A total Federal aid of $2,766,449 has now been approved for projects of this class.
21. Oil and gas operations were less than normal, owing to previous overproduction, but the leasings reached 226,910 acres; the gross oil production was 49,640,458 barrels and the total revenue $29,145,517.
One 160-acre tract on the Osage Reservation, Okla., was leased for nearly $2,000,000, and several others for more than $1,000,000 each.
The total income to the Osages from oil and gas was $24,670,483.
22. A sale of oil and gas leases on the Navajo Treaty Reserve, N. Mex., netted the Indians $80,598.
Eight oil wells were producing there at the close of the fiscal year.
Five exploratory leases were sold on the Southern Ute Reservation, N. Mex., for $43,600.
23. Employment of Indian labor was active in agricultural, mechanical, and commercial pursuits, especially in the cotton fields of the Southwest, where many Indians received good wages as cotton pickers.
Outing service by students from six of the larger schools earned about $110,000.
24. Construetive progress in irrigation was made on the Gila River Reservation in Arizona, in connection with the proposed dam now authorized across the Gila River Canyon near San Carlos; also on drainage and water systems for the Pueblos in New Mexico; in well drilling on the Navajo and Hopi Reservations, N. Mex.
25. The forestry work of the year was well maintained.
Sales of yellow pine in Oregon and Washington brought the highest prices known to that region, running as high as $6.67 per thousand.
The Menominee Indian mills in Wisconsin eut 20,000,000 feet of lumber, and the total sales of lumber on all reservations was $510,312,449 feet for the sum of $1,932,001.20.
26. In pursuance of legislation extending citizenship to all Indians, steps were taken to inform the Indians through field officials of their suffrage rights under State laws and that their restricted property will continue under Federal protection.
27. For the restricted Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes, numbering about 17,500, there was expended $3,152,040.34 for houses, barns, wells, and livestock.
The school attendance of these tribes was 19,586; the gross oil production from their lands was 10,665.492 barrels, and their total income from this product was $3,580,007.
The Indian Serviee assisted in an investigation of the handling of the estates of these Indians under State jurisdiction, and upon reports submitted, legislation for restoring to the Federal Government the complete administration of these estates has been sought.
28. Eleven leases covering approximately 1,900 acres were made in the Quapaw Reservation, Okla., for lead and zinc mining at increased royalty rates.
29. Heirship cases numbering 2,125 and 207 wills were disposed of and $71,000 in fees collected and covered into the United States Treasury.
1. Paid for pensions $229,994,777.60.
2. Returned to the Treasury $23,125,719.28 of the amount appropriated for the payment of pensions.
3. Returned to the Treasury $146,064.25 of the sum appropriated for the maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries of special examiners.
4. Returned to the Treasury $2,876.98 of the amount appropriated for per diem and expenses of special examiners.
6. Received and classified 115,825 claims, of which 33,917 were based on Civil War service and 60,342 on account of Spanish War service.
7. Disposed of 115,089 pension claims, of which 36,578 were on account of Civil War service and 56,280 based on Spanish War service.
8. Issued 61,096 pension certificates, 907 reissues in lieu of lost certificates, 10,842 accrued pension orders, and 3,566 reimbursement orders on which $168,071.24 was allowed as reimbursement for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners.
9. Prepared and mailed 6,577,171 checks carrying payments aggregating $239,048,814.43 for pensions, annuities, refunds, and fees and expenses of examining surgeons.
10. Conducted a survey of bureau methods eliminating lost motion, duplications of service, and unnecessary review of work, with a resultant improvement of service to the public, more expeditious settlement of claims, a reduction of 150 in the clerical force, and an estimated saving of $246,000 a year in the conduct of the bureau.
11. Coordinated the work of the finance and disbursing divisions, dispensed with voucher requirement, saving trouble and expense to a large number of pensioners, and simplified schedules of payments, doing away with the preparation and submission of approximately 75,000 schedule sheets a year at a saving in labor, time, and material of approximately $20,000 a year' to the Government.
12. Under act of May 22, 1920, for retirement of employees of the classified civil service, disbursed for annuities $5,692,443.59 and for refunds $2,864,138.12.
13. Returned to the Treasury $2,964.50 of the amount appropriated for cost of administration of the retirement act.
14. Disposed of 1,637 of the 1,780 claims for annuity on account of age and 753 of the 931 claims for annuity on account of disability.
15. Disposed of 43,567 of the 43,793 claims for refund made by persons separated from the classified civil service.
16. The amount of the civil service retirement and disability fund on June 30, 1924, was $33,586,193.19.
17. Execution by pensioners of approximately 200,000 vouchers each year preliminary to issuance of pension checks discontinued, thereby saving pensioners expenses estimated at from $100,000 to $200,000 a year.
18. Practice of rejection of claims, because medical examiners were unduly technical, eliminated through order of Secretary of the Interior providing that findings of examining surgeons must not be set aside without cogent reasons.
19. Through cooperation with State Department, pension checks to pensioners are now being sent to accredited representatives abroad who satisfy themselves as to the identity of persons to whom checks are delivered.
1. The removal of the bureau from the Pension Office Building to the Interior Department Building on November 1, 1923, distinctly improved the facilities of cooperation between the Bureau of Education and the Department of the Interior and other bureaus and offices in the department because of proximity and convenience.
2. Twenty-three members of the bureau's staff, exclusive of the commissioner, rendered an aggregate of 883 days of field service outside of the District of Columbia.
Addresses were delivered in 26 different States to audiences approximating 41,227 individuals.
3. The commissioner traveled 58,140 miles, spent 173 dàys in the field, and conducted four national educational conferences, besides delivering numerous addresses before educational societies, institutions of higher education, business organizations, and the like.
4. A national conference on illiteracy was held in the auditorium of the Department of the Interior on January 11–14, 1924, which attracted much attention from the press and public.
5. During the session of the National Education Association at Washington in July, 1924, the bureau prepared an elaborate exhibit of educational material, showing the status and progress of education in the United States, which was exhibited in the Interior Department Building.
6. The following edueational surveys were made: Higher education : State system of Massachusetts, Tennessee, and Cleveland, Ohio.
County and other local systems of public education: Phoenix Union High School, Arizona; Currituck County, N. C.
Orangeburg, S. C.
Arlington, Fairfax, Princess Anne, King William, King and Queen, and Chesterfield Counties, Va.
City schools: Swarthmore and Radnor Township, Pa.
Alexandria, Va.
Fairmont, W. Va., and Uniontown, Pa.
7. The assistant specialist in higher education cooperated with the Pan American Highway Commission in organizing and inviting to the United States a group of notable men connected with the departments of public works, financial experts, chief highway inspectors, etc., of Latin America.
He accompanied them on their tour of typical States of the Union.
8. The specialist in city schools organized the third national conference on the work-study-play or platoon plan, which was held in cooperation with the department .
9. In cooperation with the American Home Economies Association at its annual meetings in Chicago, July 31, 1923, and New Orleans, La., January 1, 1924, two conferences were conducted.
The specialist in home economies planned the program and conducted the National Home Economics Conference, which was called by the Commissioner of Education for April 21 to 24 at Washington, D. C.
10. Forty-two bulletins were issued, also leaflets and circulars to the number of 103.
The May and June numbers of School Life, the periodical published by the bureau, were devoted to the activities of the office and the several bureaus of the Department of the Interior.
11. A clip sheet of educational items was inaugurated during the year.
12. More than a thousand readers enrolled during the year for one or more of the courses prepared by the home education section.
700 readers have received çertificates since the inauguration of this work by the bureau.
The Second National Conference on Home Education was called by the Commissioner of Education at the University of Minnesota.
13. In order to enhance the work in Alaska the superintendent of education for the natives of Alaska, Mr. W. T. Lopp, was stationed at Anchorage, Alaska, with duties of a supervisory character.
The Secretary of the Interior, at the request of the Commissioner of Education, created the position of Chief of the Alaska Division, Bureau of Education, with headquarters at Seattle, Wash.
Mr. Jonathan H. Wagner was appointed to this position.
14. Eighty-three schools were conducted in Alaska with 151 teachers, including schoolroom teachers, superintendents, and principals.
The total number of pupils enrolled in the schools was 3,910.
16. The reindeer industry of Alaska is reported as flourishing.
The total number of reindeer is now estimated at 350,000, of which about 235,000 are owned by the natives themselves.
1. Made geologic surveys in 44 States and in Alaska, the work done including geologic mapping, determinations of stratigraphy, structure, and geologic history, and examinations of mineral resources.
2. Made studies in eight States to determine the prospects of obtaining oil and gas and prepared reports showing the results of the studies.
3. Continued laboratory work to discover the sources of petroleum and the mode of its formation and the features of oil sands—such as texture and porosity—that are favorable to the accumulation of petroleum.
4. Made researches in the field and the laboratory to determine the mode of formation of oil shale.
5. Continued to assist the United States Coal Commission by furnishing facts concerning the coal regions.
6. Continued cooperation with the General Land Office, the Indian Office, and the Forest Service in the examination and classification of public lands, the work being done especially to determine whether they contain oil, gas, or other mineral deposits.
7. Examined coal fields in six States, prepared eight reports (four for publication elsewhere), and published three reports and four press notices on fields examined.
8. Made cooperative field studies of ore deposits, coal beds, and geologic formations with 12 States.
9. Made special studies of metalliferous deposits in Michigan and California with a view to the broader application of the results.
10. Continued the search for deposits of potash and found deposits in southwestern Texas that promise to be of commercial value.
11. Made geologic examinations of sites for dams and reservoirs in Western States in cooperation with the Bureau of Reclamation, to determine the strength, imperviousness, and other features of the rocks.
12. Completed cooperative field work on a geologic map of Arizona, to be published by the State, and completed office work on a geologie map of Wyoming, now in preparation for publication.
13. Aided in completing and publishing a report on the geology of Haiti, the cost of which was borne by the Haitian Government.
14. Identified thousands of fossils sent in from different parts of the United States and from the West Indies and Central and South America, for stratigraphic determination and correlation, principally as a means of disclosing the geologic horizons at which oil may be found.
15. Continued to study the San Andreas earthquake rift in California in cooperation with the Seismological Society of America, the Carnegie Institution, and the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
16. Published 30 reports on the geologic features and mineral resources of areas in different parts of the United States.
17. Collected and published statistics of mineral production and cooperated in this work with 16 States and the Bureau of the Census.
18. Assisted the United States Coal Commission to the date of its termination, maintained contact with the Department of Commerce in its studies of special features of the coal industry, and made and reported on four canvasses of consumers' stocks of coal in cooperation with the Bureau of the Census.
19. Issued weekly reports showing the production of coal, prepared and published monthly statements on the production of petroleum, and compiled for the Federal Trade Commission special statistical reports on petroleum.
20. Prepared a map showing petroleum and natural gas fields and petroleum pipe lines in Texas.
21. Continued the compilation of data showing mineral production in foreign countries and the world's fuel reserves.
22. Made field investigations to determine resources of arsenie in Western States.
23. Made 782 quantitative analyses of rocks and minerals and identified 2,698 mineral specimens.
24. Made laboratory studies to determine the mode of formation of metallic copper in ore deposits.
25. Made studies of the chemical nature of the organic matter in oil shale, in order to discover the mode of formation of petroleum and other natural hydrocarbons.
26. Made a series of assays for determining the presence of small quantities of platinum in rocks.
27. Made 662 analyses of potash salts in material from Texas, disclosing promising potash-rich beds.
28. Measured deep earth temperatures and temperatures of hot springs in a study of the temperatures at depths in the earth's crust.
29. Made laboratory studies of the texture, pore space, and productivity of oil sands.
30. Continued the survey of naval petroleum reserve No. 4, traversing areas aggregating 220 linear miles along six rivers, exploring the lower part of Wainwright Inlet, and mapping 2,150 square miles in northern Alaska.
31. Made reconnaissance geologic surveys elsewhere in Alaska covering 8,570 square miles and reconnaissance topographic surveys covering 4,300 square miles.
32. Continued the study of the copper deposits of Prince William Sound and of the geology and mineral resources of southeastern Alaska, especially the Hyder district, and of the nickel deposits in the Sitka district.
33. Continued the study of the stratigraphy of Alaska Peninsula, especially the Cold Bay petroleum field and the Chignik district.
34. Completed a report on the Mesozoic geology of Alaska.
35. Continued an examination of the ore deposits and other mineral resources in the region along the Alaska Railroad, and prepared and published a report (Bulletin 755-C) giving its results.
36. Completed a study of the Tertiary flora of Alaska and assembled the results in form for early publication.
37. Revised for republication the geographic dictionary of Alaska.
38. Published a report on work done in Alaska in 1921, three chapters of a similar report on work done in 1922, and a bulletin on the Ruby-Kuskokwim region.
39. Published a large relief map of Alaska, in which the topographic features are brought out by brown shading and the water features are shown in blue.
40. Surveyed for mapping 16,021 square miles in the United States, resurveyed 644 square miles, and made river profile surveys covering 818 linear miles, running in connection with these surveys 7,781 linear miles of primary levels and setting 2,059 permanent bench marks.
41. Occupied 177 triangulation stations, of which 122 were permanently marked.
42. Ran primary traverse lines aggregating 5,832 miles and in connection therewith set 1,450 permanent marks.
43. Completed 696 square miles of topographie surveys in Hawaii, the work ineluding the running of 228 miles of primary levels and the establishment of 90 bench marks.
44. Compiled for the Air Service of the United States Army airroute maps of more than 100,000 square miles of territory.
45. Prepared maps of proposed dam sites on Colorado River and a map of Arizona showing their location.
47. Continued cooperation in topographic surveys with 19 States and with Hawaii, and performed base-map work for the National Park Service, the United States Coal Commission, the General Land Office, and the Federal Board for Vocational Education.
48. Published editions of 70 new topographie maps that form sheets of the Topographic Atlas of the United States (including shaded relief editions of seven standard maps), maps of Alabama and Arizona, a shaded relief map of Kentucky, and photolithographic editions of 92 new maps (to be engraved later), of 34 maps not yet scheduled for engraving, and of 17 river plans and profiles.
49. Published à bulletin (No. 709) giving in one volume the results of triangulation in the United States in 1916–1918.
50. Published a bulletin (No. 689) describing the boundaries, areas, geographie centers, and altitudes of the United States and the several States.
51. Continued stream gauging at more than 1,600 stations on rivers in 41 States and in Hawaii to determine the quantities of water available for irrigation, power, and other uses, performing part of the work in cooperation with 29 States and Hawaii and with the Bureau of Reclamation, Forest Service, National Park Service, Office of Indian Affairs, Federal Power Commission, Ofice of the Chief of Engineers, and city of San Francisco.
52. Made investigations of ground water in 16 States, cooperating in this work in certain areas with five States, the Bureau of Reelamation, and the General Land Office.
53. Analyzed 819 samples of water and made studies to improve methods of water analysis.
54. Prepared monthly reports on the production of electricity and the consumption of fuel by public-utility power plants and on the stocks of coal on hand at such plants and a report on the developed water power of the United States.
55. Made surveys of all promising dam sites along Colorado River from Lees Ferry to the lower end of Black Canyon and began the preparation of a report showing the results of the work done.
56. Made examinations of power sites, proposed power developments, the power value of streams and lands, and the use of water for power and irrigation in eight States, these examinations including several items of work done for the Federal Power Commission.
57. Continued examinations of public lands for classification under the enlarged and stock-raising homestead laws, performing such work in 18 States and covering areas embraced in about 2,000 applications.
58. Classified 1,812,685 acres of public land as coal land and 4,105 acres as oil land and made other classifications involving a net decrease of 2,998,210 acres in areas withdrawn as possible coal land and of 421,723 acres in'areas withdrawn as possible oil land.
59. Reported on 14,782 cases arising under the administration of the public-land laws.
60. Reported on 6,282 applications made for permits, leases, or patents under the mineral-land laws.
61. Recommended the addition of 153,052 acres to the power-site reserves and the elimination of 58,537 acres.
62. Increased the area withdrawn under the Nevada ground-water reclamation act from 1,300,940 acres to 1,425,060 acres.
63. Recommended designations involving 1,379,449 acres of land available for settlement under the enlarged-homestead acts and the cancellation of designations involving 12,379 acres.
64. Recommended the addition of 107,384 acres to the publie water reserves and the elimination of 6,783 acres.
65. Recommended the designation of 1,801,441.
66. Edited and otherwise prepared for printing 27,981 pages of manuscript, read and corrected 2,306 galley proofs and 15,928 page proofs, and prepared indexes for 25 reports covering 4,455 pages.
67. Prepared for reproduction in reports 4,442 illustrations.
68. Edited for engraving 90 new topographic maps and for reprint 222 topographic maps, edited 54 plan and profile river survey sheets for photolithographic reproduction and 249 maps for incorporation in Geological Survey reports, and read proofs of 613 maps.
69. Published 114 reports, containing 14,543 pages, in editions of 351,107 copies, 4 geologic folios in editions of 15,485 copies, and 92 new or revised topographic maps and 203 reprinted maps in editions of 1,339,173 copies.
735,573 maps, a total of 1,274,725 publications, of which 617,391 were sold.
71. Engraved and printed 70 new maps and completed the engraving for 32 new maps, photolithographed and printed 92 new maps, made corrections on the engraved plates for 214 maps, and reprinted editions of 193 maps and of 10 corrected State and other photolithographed maps.
72. Printed for other branches of the Government or for incorporation in reports in the Geological Survey 4,655,982 copies of maps, plans, sections, etc., the work involving more than 23,000,000 impressions.
74. Maintained a geologic library, receiving accessions of 14,655 books, pamphlets, periodicals, and maps, affording facilities for 12,- 908 readers, and lending for use outside of the library 7,054 books and maps.
75. Received 348,361 letters and other pieces of mail, sent out 883,179 pieces, and handled 3,505 pieces of freight and express, outgoing and incoming.
1. Cooperated with the committee of special advisers on reclamation appointed by the Secretary of the Interior to make an intensive and exhaustive analysis of reclamation project operations.
The report of the committee was published as Senate Document No. 92, Sixty-eighth Congress, first session.
2. Under the direction of expert coordinators, reorganized the Washington and Denver offices of the bureau with a view to greater efficiency and economy by eliminating unnecessary work, duplication of effort, and other unbusinesslike methods, and by abolishing unnecessary positions, resulting in an annual saving of $103,000.
3. Reassigned the work of the bureau, confining the engineering work to the chief engineer; matters pertaining to settlement, crop production, industrial betterments, and other questions dealing with the farmers, to the director of farm economics; and financial matters to the director of finance; the three division heads working under the direct supervision of the commissioner.
4. Abolished the positions of Assistant Commissioner and chief counsel and the position of chief accountant and centralized the accounting work of the bureau in Denver.
5. Terminated the services of 15 consulting engineers who had been carried on the rolls of the bureau at salaries ranging from $9 to $50 per day when actually employed.
6. In accordance with the recommendation of the President, advocated a bill to grant relief to water users on the projects by extension of time of payments due on the charges for operation and maintenance and construction.
The bill was passed and its provisions put into operation immediately, with resulting benefit to the water users.
7. Initiated and continued investigations of a large number of new projects to determine their feasibility, chief among which are the Kittitas division of the Yakima project in Washington; the Baker, Vale, and Owyhee projects in Oregon; the Spanish Springs extension of the Newlands project in Nevada; the Weber-Provo division of the Salt Lake Basin project in Utah; and the Guernsey Reservoir on the North Platte project in Wyoming.
8. Initiated studies of settlement and colonization conditions in this and other countries with a view to adopting the best settlement plans for Federal irrigation projects.
9. Continued the investigation of the Colorado River Basin, looking to storage and control of the river, on the engineering features of which a voluminous report was prepared.
10. Continued investigations of the feasibility of the Columbia Basin development, a report on which was prepared supplementing previous studies by the State of Washington.
11. Continued preliminary work in connection with the proposed American Falls Dam on Snake River, Idaho.
12. Virtually completed the Tieton Dam on the Yakima project, Washington, to be 244 feet high and impound 202,500 acre-feet of water, supplementing the supply for the Yakima project and proposed extensions.
13. Virtually completed the Black Canyon Dam, in Idaho, 183 feet high, to divert water from Payette River, for the irrigation of lands in the Emmett irrigation district and possible extensions of the Boise project.
14. Began construction of the McKay Dam for the development of the greater Umatilla project, Oregon; and of the Gerber Dam on the Klamath project, Oregon-California.
1. Rendered assistance at 25 accidents, 22 of these being in coal mines and 3 in metal mines.
3. Carried on an intensive campaign which has resulted in many coal mines adopting rock dusting as a preventive of disastrous explosions.
4. Made a survey of the sources of limestone, gypsum, and anhydrite available near coal mines for making rock dust, and issued specifications for suitable dusts.
5. Developed international cooperation with the mines department of Great Britain in research looking to the reduction of accidents in coal mines.
6. Condueted and assisted at 44 State and local first-aid meets in mining distriets.
8. Continued to extend safety training in the oil industry.
9. Enlarged the library of industrial motion pictures and exhibited to over 1,239,000 people more than 500 sets of films, costing over $1,000,000.
Issued statistical reports on accidents at coal mines, metal mines, quarries, coke ovens, and metallurgical plants in connection with mine-safety work.
11. Investigated all of the coal-mine explosions that occurred in the United States during the year, and made special reports on the specifie cause and the precautions necessary to prevent a repetition.
12. Developed a “self-rescuer" mask for use by miners as a life saver when caught in gas after a fire or explosion.
13. Carried on an intensive safety campaign in the oil industry.
14. In cooperation with manufacturers of gas appliances and the Bureau of Standards, developed a natural-gas heater that is free from carbon monoxide under ordinary gas pressures.
15. Practically completed an extensive study of dust, ventilation, and humidity conditions in metal mines, yielding fundamental data on the relation to comfort and health of the men.
16. Developed a standard test for determining fineness of pulverized coal, completed combustion tests on efficiency of a large power plant using pulverized coal, and finished an investigation of explosion hazards in the handling and use of powdered coal.
17. Conducted tests to learn the most efficient methods of blasting coal so as to produce the most lump coal with the least explosive, and issued recommendations that have been tested out in several large mines in Pennsylvania with satisfactory results.
18. Completed a survey of ash content in anthracite as marketed in Massachusetts, selected as a typical State, which showed that the ash averaged 13 to 19 per cent.
19. Condueted experiments on gasoline storage tanks which demonstrated the most effective methods of construction for preventing loss by evaporation.
20. Continued to cooperate with oil-well operators by advising as to the best method of drilling and casing wells.
22. Completed a study of oil-field emulsions and showed that much of the present waste of oil in emulsion can be avoided by use of improved methods.
23. Obtained detailed information on methods of pumping oil in various fields, which many operators are putting into use to reduce pumping costs.
24. Developed a fractionating column for crude oil distillation which is more efficient than those now in use and simplifies the process of distillation.
25. Completed tests of burning, fuel, and lubricating oils from Pacific coast crudes, which show that with few exceptions they meet the standard Federal specifications.
26. Developed in cooperation with the Army and Navy Air Services a helium plant that produces the gas more cheaply than any plant hitherto constructed.
27. Demonstrated that a good grade of foundry iron can be produced from steel scrap in the electric furnace, an achievement of special importance to the development of an iron industry in the Pacific coast States.
28. Improved the bureau's sponge-iron furnace so that almost any type of iron ore can be smelted in it to make sponge iron.
29. Blew in a new experimental blast furnace which is bigger and better than the one successfully operated last year.
30. Obtained comprehensive data on briquetting practice in the retorting of zinc ores, which will enable a zinc operator to select the process and the type of briquet best suited to his purpose.
31. Made a thorough study of methods of retorting the residues from zinc smelters, which residues carry 5 to 15 per cent of the zinc charged.
32. Studied the losses in copper smelter slags, and mapped out a program for a determined attack on this problem.
33. Finished a comprehensive survey of ore-dressing practice in the United States, in cooperation with the Institute of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers.
34. Developed a process for preparing solutions of ferric sulphate, an effective agent for leaching certain ores.
35. Developed an efficient classifier for treating complex lead-zine ores, which is being used in several large western mills treating ores of this type.
36. Studied fuel-burning practice at various refractories plants in the Eastern States, with the result that most of the plants were shown how to produce more and better ware with less fuel.
37. Completed research work showing the causes and effect of sulphur in clays on the brick, and how to fire the kilns to reduce losses from defective brick.
38. Developed a process for preparing aluminum sulphate from low-grade clays and also from Utah alunite, which will provide a much-needed cheap source of aluminum sulphate for making alum and aluminum salts.
39. Produced artificial sillimanite in the electric furnace, and continued work to eliminate irregularities in the product.
40. Demonstrated that a new method of drilling slate in quarries will greatly decrease the waste as compared with channeling.
41. Carried on blasting tests which have shown the most efficient ways of using different explosives in metal mines under difficult conditions.
42. Completed an extensive survey of those properties of ammonium nitrate that influence safety in storage, handling, and use.
43. Made a comprehensive study, for the Senate Commission of Gold and Silver Inquiry, of possible new uses for silver.
44. Made a field study, for the Department of Commerce, of the Chilean nitrate industry, which shows that there are still large reserves and that nitrate is being mined efficiently and sold at a justifiable price.
45. Continued the study of gummy deposits in gas meters, and determined that indene and styrine are two of the objectionable elements that cause trouble by precipitating tar in gas meters.
46. Determined the mechanism of seale formation in boilers and the conditions necessary to prevent the forming of seale.
1. Handled largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the national parks; 1924 season, 1,422,353 visitors, as against 1,280,886 during 1923 and 1,044,502 in 1922.
2. Hándled largest volume of automobile travel in the history of the national parks; 1924 season, 281,109 cars; 1923 season, 271,482 cars; 1922 season, 197,105 cars.
3. Handled largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the national monuments; 1924 season, 248,555 visitors; 1923 season, 212,826 visitors; 1922 season, 172,005 visitors.
4. Collected $663,886.32 in revenues from the operation of the national parks and monuments as against $513,706.36 in 1923 and $432,- 964.89 in 1922.
5. Accepted, through the department, deeds giving title to three tracts of land in Lafayette National Park; also donations of money and other gifts from park friends.
6. Secured donation of $70,500 from the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, through the American Association of Museums, for the construction of an adequate fireproof museum building and equipment in Yosemite National Park.
7. Secured donation of $5,500 for the completion of one wing of a museum building in Mesa Verde National Park.
8. Director of National Park Service appointed member of National Capital Park Commission, which was created by Congress to study the possibilities of enlarging and developing the park system of the District of Columbia.
9. Continued cooperation with Public Health Service in improving sanitary conditions in parks.
10. Secured cooperation of the United States Geological Survey in preparing topographic map of Lassen Volcanic National Park.
12. Cooperated with United States Bureau of Fisheries and State fish hatcheries in fish planting in park lakes and streams.
13. Arranged for improved facilities of public utilities and expanded public camp grounds for motorists.
14. Secured authorization of $7,500,000 three-year program of road construction and betterment and made preliminary plans for initiation of this road work as soon as funds are available.
15. Consummated important land exchanges in Glacier National Park.
16. Continued operation of Government free bathhouse in Hot Springs National Park, giving a total of 59,683 baths to 4,025 persons.
Also examined and treated 3,676 persons in the free clinic in cooperation with Publie Health Service.
17. Continued and expanded the free nature guide service in the national parks.
18. Stimulated use of national parks during the winter for winter sports.
19. Resisted efforts of cattle and sheepmen to open the parks to grazing and afforded protection to animal and plant life of parks.
20. Carried on restoration work on ruins in several of southwestern monuments and continued under permit archaeological investigation of the National Geographic Society in the Chaco Canyon National Monument.
21. Through landscape engineering division greatly improved landscape conditions in national parks.
22. Through civil engineering division carried on important road projects in parks both by contract and by force account.
23. Assumed charge of two new national monuments created by presidential proclamation, namely, Carlsbad Cave, N. Mex., and Craters of the Moon, Idaho.
24. Continued the stimulation of interest in State parks through the Fourth State Park Conference held at Gettysburg, Pa.
25. Prepared and distributed 411,400 publications relating to the national parks.
26. Prepared and distributed 219,000 automobile maps of the national parks, and distributed nearly 20,000 copies of the national park-to-park highway maps which were donated to the service.
27. Cooperated with highway automobile and other associations, as well as with newspapers and magazines, in dissemination of information regarding parks.
29. Greatly improved the working and living conditions of field employees in the national parks, and maintained high efficiency of field personnel in various parks and monuments.
30. Continued to handle effectively through small Washington office force the greater burden of work that resulted from increased use of parks by people.
31. In addition to the above specific accomplishments kept the administration, maintenance, and protective work in the parks and monuments to a satisfactory standard with funds provided by Congress.
The following table shows the number of matters received and disposed of during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1924.
The table is confined to matters docketed and recorded, but does not include a large number of miscellaneous matters of which no formal record is kept, nor does it show in detail the numerous hearings and personal interviews covering many important matters transacted by the office.
The report shows practically the same number of matters pending at the close of this year as were pending at the beginning, but more cases were disposed of during the year than in the preceding year, the figures being, respectively, 17,872 this year and 15,927 last year, an increase of about 2,000.
Yet the arrears in public-land matters have increased.
There were carried over last year 476 appeals and motions for rehearing.
This year the record shows pendency of 659 such cases.
Pension appeals increased; notwithstanding which the arrears have been slightly cut down.
War minerals cases show the most marked reduction.
From a total of 425 the figures have been reduced to 91, and were it not that certain rulings in two court cases, adverse to previous rulings of the department, have retarded disposition of this class of cases the entire work would have been closed out.
The greatest increase during the year was in the class of matters collected under the heading of “Miscellaneous," which includes a great many subjects requiring far more time and consideration than appealed cases.
Beginning July 1, 1924, the legal work heretofore done in the Washington headquarters of the Bureau of Reclamation has been transferred to this office.
Twice as many suits in equity and actions at law against the department were filed in the Supreme Court of the District as were filed last year—22 in all.
During the year two cases were decided in the United States Supreme Court, both favorably to the department.
In the Court of Appeals two of five cases disposed of were lost.
Both cases involved the war minerals relief act.
In the Supreme Court 5 of 18 cases in which final decree or judgment was entered were decided unfavorably to the contentions of the department.
At the close of the year 7 cases were pending in the United States Supreme Court, 11 in the Court of Appeals, and 17 in the Supreme Court; a total of 35.
Action in interlocutory matters is not included in this report.
One case in the United States Supreme Court has been argued and submitted but was undecided at the close of the term.
Six cases in the Supreme Court of the District were also under submission at the close of this report.
The war-minerals relief work began in the spring of 1919 with an organization separate from this office—3 commissioners and 66 engineers, accountants, law examiners, clerks, ete.
The monthly pay roll aggregated $14,140.
There were filed 1,207 cases for consideration.
The amendatory act of 1921 increased the number to 1,269.
By May, 1923, the force had been much reduced-to 1 commissioner and 12 attorneys, engineers, accountants, and clerks.
Prior to that time this office had considered such war minerals cases as came to it by way of appeal to the Secretary.
But in May, 1923, the work itself was transferred to this office and the remaining cases undisposed of by the commission were docketed here as original actions.
There were 538 such cases.
In other words, 731 claims have been disposed of during the preceding four years.
The report closing June 30, 1924, shows 91 cases still pending, 447 having been decided within the 14 months; and, as hereinbefore stated, the work should have been entirely finished were it not that the Court of Appeals has decided that the purchase price of real property and interest on borrowed capital are factors of loss for which allowance must be made in the liquidation of claims.
If the Supreme Court of the United States reverses these holdings the remaining cases will be speedily settled.
In the meantime the force has been numerically reduced.
On July 1, 1924, a commissioner and four accountants and clerks remain.
The monthly expenditure on account of salaries for services devoted to this work May 1, 1923, was $3,033.33.
It is now $1,431.67.
Area of land entered and patented.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1924, is 4,564,412 acres, not including 129,871 acres embraced in finals not heretofore counted as original disposition of land.
The latter area is constituted as follows: Public auction.
33,459 acres; abandoned military reservations, 69 acres; cash and private sales, individual claimants and small holding claims, 4,756 acres; preemption entries, 3,117 acres; soldiers' additional homesteads, 1,153 acres; timber and stone entries, 32,502 acres; mineral entries, 54,295 acres; coal entries, 520 acres.
The area of 4,564,412 acres is a decrease of 1,850,590 acres as compared with the area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 1923.
2,812,624 acres were allowed under the stock raising act of December 29, 1916.
The area patented during the fiscal year 1924 is 8,826,039 acres, a decrease of 569,777 acres as compared with the fiscal year 1923.
Of the above area, 5,530,781 acres were patented under the homestead laws, a decrease of 779,149 acres, not including as homestead 1,417 acres patented as soldiers' additional entries.
Cash receipts and expenditures.
The total cash receipts from sales, leases, and other disposition of public lands (including receipts for copies of records, sales of Government property, etc.), for the fiscal year 1924 were $16,013,915.07, and from sales of Indian lands, $359,088.97, an aggregate of $16,373,004.04, all of which was deposited in the Treasury.
Five per cent of the net proceeds from cash sales of public lands are paid to the public-land States within which such sales were made, and the balance of such net receipts from States included within the reclamation act, together with the net receipts from fees and commissions from these States, are paid into the reclamation fund; 90 per cent of the net receipts under the mineral leasing act from lands outside of naval petroleum reserves are divided between the States from which the mineral (principally oil) were taken and the reclamation fund; the receipts from sales of reclamation town sites and royalties and rentals from potash deposits are deposited directly into the reclamation fund; the receipts from sales of Indian lands are deposited to the credit of the various Indian tribes.
All other moneys received were covered into the Treasury to the credit of the general fund.
It may be noted from the above table that after the deposit of receipts for the benefit of special purposes, reclamation fund, State fund, and Indian trust funds there remains a balance of $2,857,220.34 to the credit of the general fund, subject to appropriation by Congress.
As the total expenditures for the conduct of the business of the General Land Office, including the expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers and incidental expenses ($674,379.86), for the fiscal year 1924 amounted to $2.936,238.29, it will be seen that the cost of operation of the General Land Office was $79,017.95 more than the amount credited from its receipts to the general fund.
Disbursements from the following trust funds and reimbursable appropriations are not included in the above figures as receipts or disbursements: From deposits by individuals for surveying public lands, $72,029.97: from completing surveys within railroad land grants and surveying within land grants (reimbursable), $4,617.08; from opening Indian reservations (reimbursable), $33.49; from surveving and allotting Indian reservations (reimbursable), $34,850.93; from Indian moneys, proceeds of labor, surveying, etc., Crow (act of June 4, 1920), $336.55; and from allotments to nonremoval, Mille Lac Indians, Minnesota, $1,506.71.
Field service.
The total amount of cash collected and turned into the Treasury as the result of the work of the field service was $67,835.29: of this amount $26,385.70 was in settlement of timber trespass cases and $10,525.57 was secured from timber sales; $30,- 924.02 was recovered through civil and criminal action brought by the Department of Justice in cases of depredations on the publie land and violation of the public land laws through proceedings instituted by the service.
As the result of investigations 170,400 acres were restored during the vear to the public domain through proceedings based upon special agents' reports.
Special agents have investigated and reported 13,680 cases, of which 3,169 were adversely and 10,511 favorably reported; 286 hearings in Government contest cases have been held.
Civil suits in 101 cases were recommended to the Department of Justice; 50 suits were won and 5 lost.
As a result of successful prosecution during the year $27,474.02 was recovered and 2,852.83 acres were restored to the public domain.
Seventy-six indictments were reported for offenses under the public land laws.
Of the criminal cases tried during the year, 27 resulted in convictions, under which there were 17 prison sentences imposed and fines amounting to $3,450 paid.
Surveys.
The public-land survey was extended during the fiseal year in 21 States and in the Territory of Alaska under 233 separate groups, and resurveys of all elasses were made in 17 States under 80 groups.
In addition, miscellaneous surveys, including work for and in cooperation with other Government agencies, were executed in every part of the public domain.
Original subdivisional surveys, which in later vears have been largely restricted to isolated areas in mountainous and desert country, and which are gradually becoming more fragmentary in character, together with such resurveys and other work as can be measured on a mileage basis, aggregated 22,450 linear miles at an average cost of $19.60 per mile.
During the year there have been accepted and placed on file plats representing 5,151,- 820 acres of original surveys of public lands, and in addition 1,441,- 628 acres of lands resurveyed.
Map making and drafting.
The United States map for 1923 was printed, mounted, and a congressional quota delivered.
Copper plates for 1924 edition have been corrected and are now in the hands of the contractor for lithographing, printing, and mounting.
A State map of Washington has been issued, and maps of Kansas, Utah, and New Mexico are in process of compilation.
Eight thousand seven hundred and forty-five photolithographic copies of township plats were sold, for which $4,373 was received, and 8,373 copies furnished to this and other Government agencies for official use.
Tract book notations.
The total number of notations for the year was 271.710.
This includes 95,876 appeals and other miscellaneous cases; 843 Indian allotments; 18,878 final and cash certificates, and 16,463 original entries; plats posted, 1,193.
Homestead and kindred entries.
Approved for patenting 17,013 final entries of all kinds, as against 19,138 the previous year.
The work is current and all cases received acted upon in the order of their reception.
Soldiers' additional homestead rights.
Sixty-seven new cases were received during the year; 41 entries were approved and patented and 26 applications finally rejected, with 114 cases now pending.
Stock-raising homesteads.
During the present year 7,006 stockraising homestead entries have been allowed, which cover an area of 2,812,624 acres.
Total number of entries allowed since the passage of the act, 98,048, covering a total acreage of 38,478,606 acres.
Stock driveways.
The area withdrawn during the year for this purpose aggregates 137,087 acres and that released from such withdrawal 52,780 acres.
The total gross area included in driveway withdrawals at the close of the fiscal year is 9,108,839 acres.
Grazing on public lands.
The commissioner renews his recommendation of the previous year for legislation that will authorize the Secretary of the Interior to set apart public lands suitable chiefly for grazing and lease the same under regulations, and in such bodies .
Town-site activities.
Among the more notable movements in this field may be mentioned the sale of town lots at Harding, Fla., for approximately $386,000, the highest price realized for any town site opened thus far by the Interior Department.
The opening of Ford town site, California, sale of forfeited Flathead villa sites, the issuance of patents for the town sites of Rowood and Dos Cabezas, Ariz., reappraisal of unsold town lots at Omak, Wash., are also noted.
In Alaska the town sites of Craig and Hyder were approved for patenting; the fourth addition to Anchorage, embracing 401 acres, was opened to entry, and an acreage addition to Nenana involving 788 acres was also opened.
During the year, 984 town lots in the public-land States and Alaska have been approved for patent.
Minnesota and Arkansas drainage acts.
Provisions of these acts are restricted to the State of Minnesota and the counties of Poinsett and Mississippi, in the State of Arkansas.
Under these laws there have been patented during the year 86 cash entries in addition to 28: final homesteads covered by drainage charges involving approximately 7,240 acres.
Under the said acts there have been patented about 1,048,000 acres.
Rights of way.
One hundred and fifty-nine railroad rights-ofway applications were received, which together with those pending at the beginning of the year made a total of 191.
Thirty-two cases are pending at the present time.
Stock-watering reservoirs.
Two hundred and thirty-six stockwatering reservoir cases were received during the year, which, with those pending at the beginning of the year, have been the subject of action in the office.
All other rights of way.
Six hundred and fifty-seven miscellaneous applications were received, which with those on hand made a total of 719.
Under action taken, 32 cases remain for consideration by the office.
Forfeiture.
The number of approved rights of way of all kinds subject to forfeiture July 1, 1923, was 3,313.
During the year 33 new cases were received and 1,720 cases upon which interlocutory action had been taken, making a grand total of 5,066 cases.
Of these, after action taken on approvals, cancellations, judicial forfeitures, and other actions, there now remain 1,923 cases.
State irrigation districts.
Since the passage of the act of August 11, 1916, applications by 27 irrigation districts have been submitted for approval.
Of these, one application involving approximately 10,427 acres, was received during the past year.
Since the passage of the act applications by 13 districts embracing 1,128,393 acres have been approved; 7 having a gross area of 129,367.97 acres have beem finally refused approval.
Private irrigation projects.
During the year reports on the projects of 43 irrigation companies and districts have been considered and finally disposed of.
In 18 cases affecting approximately 131 desert-land entries and applications conclusions were favorable; in 14 cases affecting 149 entries and applications the conclusions reached were unfavorable, while 11 cases were disposed of without any definite conclusion, it appearing that there were no longer any desertland entries or applications involved.
Hydroelectric water power.
Notices of withdrawals of public lands of the United States and lands within national forests were received from the Federal Power Commission under 78 applications for water-power development and transmission.
Over 1,300 elections under section 24 of the Federal water power act were filed during the year.
A large number of applications for restoration from powersite withdrawal or classification under said section 24 have been received.The Federal Water Power Commission is now practically up to date in this class of cases, and its“determinations" are being promptly handled.
Carey Act.
Carey Act segregations aggregating 344,077 acres were finally disposed of during the year.
Of this area, 67,700 acres were patented to the several States as reclaimed and 33,688 acres representing segregations which were canceled.
Irrigation of arid land in Nevada.
Of the total number of 378 cases pending during the year 214 were approved, 45 canceled, 29 otherwise disposed of, and requirements made in 72 cases, leaving 23 pending.
Desert-land entries.
The disposals are summarized as follows: Applications to make entry, 1,438; original desert-land entries, 769; annual proof, 699; assignments, 74; extensions of time, 815; final entries, 1.281; relief act March 4, 1915, 115.
United States reclamation projects.
Entries pending at the beginning of the vear, 17; received during the year, 579; examined and accepted, 65; canceled, 76; claimants called upon for additional evidence, 201; otherwise disposed of, 170; pending at end of year, 84; final entries approved for patent, 304.
Reclamation withdrawals and ópenings.
During the fiscal year the office promulgated 41 orders of restoration and 9 orders of withdrawal under the reclamation act, one adjustment of a former withdrawal order.
The area withdrawn amounts to 118,440 acres, and the area restored totals 129,640 acres.
Opening of Indian lands.
On September 18, 1923, there were opened to homestead settlement and entry 9,404.72 acres of ceded Chippewa cut-over land.
Other openings have been limited to small tracts restored from former withdrawals.
Withdrawals and restorations.
During the past year 3,594,055 acres of public lands were withdrawn or placed in a state of reservation under the various acts applicable thereto, and 3,551,530 acres theretofore withdrawn or reserved were restored to entry or other proper disposition.
An itemized statement of these withdrawals and restorations is furnished by the commissioner.
Restoration of shore spaces in Alaska.
Twelve restorations of the 80-rod reserved shore space between claims abutting upon navigable “or other" waters in Alaska have been promulgated during the year.
Restorations and openings subject to the preference right of exservice men.
During the fiscal year the public lands in areas restored to entry or opened on survey aggregated 214,554 acres and 2,489,150 acres, respectively.
Swamp and overflowed lands.
During the past fiscal year there were patented under this act 33,821.49 acres to the several States entitled thereto.
Abandoned military reservations.
By Executive order No. 3893, dated August 13, 1923, 25 abandoned military reservations in the States of Washington and California were turned over to the Interior Department for disposition under the act of July 5, 1884.
Six of these reservations are now in process of being surveyed and appraised, 4 reservations are being appraised, while the status of other reservations is being investigated, due to the fact that some of the lands, it is alleged, were disposed of prior to their reservation for military purposes.
Other reservations or parts of reservations included in said Executive order are desired by different Government departments for their needs.
Details of proceedings in a number of cases pending before the General Land Office are furnished by the commissioner.
Chippewa logging operations.
During the past year there were cut from ceded Chippewa lands in Minnesota under the act of June 27, 1902, 19,614,610 feet of timber, for which the purchasers paid $158,548.03.
The purchasers had been granted extensions of time to complete their contracts, and under their agreements paid $7,723.75 as overhead charges and $15,849.54 as interest, to compensate the Indians.
There were also cut in trespass 32,510 feet of timber.
The total receipts from all these sourcés the past year was $183,760.94.
State grants and State selections.
Selections were made by the States of indemnity school lands amounting to 321,847.64 acres of lands in satisfaction of grants in quantity for specific purposes amounting to 48,235.60 acres.
Railroad grants and selections.
Railroad and wagon-road selections were received during the year to the amount of 149,548.71 acres, and during the same period there were allowed and patented 1,573,640.01 acres.
Coos Bay wagon-road lands.
Under the acts of June 9, 1916, and February 26, 1919, 17 sales of 60,659,000 feet, board measure, of timber were made, for which $132,864.70 was received.
Oregon and California railroad lands.
Under the act of June 9, 1916, 98 sales of timber were held during the year, involving 13,740.27 acres, containing 412,233,000 feet, board meásure, of timber, for which the sum of $789,925.45 was received.
Indian allotments.
Indian trust or restricted patents to the number of 4,196 have been issued during the year with a total area of 1,424,540 acres, and 1,484 fee patents have been issued to Indians or to purchasers with an area of 180,014 acres.
Lieu selections for lands in Indian reservations.
During the year there were five selections approved and patented containing about 2,386.30 acres, in lieu of about 2,400 acres reconveyed to the United States for reservation purposes.
Two selections were rejected and 12 new applications filed.
Exchange of lands under special acts.
The rules and regulations promulgated under the act of March 20, 1922, are used as regulations for more than 15 other special acts; 38 informal applications have been received and conditionally approved embracing an area of base land tendered to the Government of approximately 50,394 acres for national forest purposes; 7 selections have been approved for patent resulting in the acquirement by the Government of 4,880 acres for forest purposes.
Details of exchanges under these acts are set forth in the commissioner's report.
National forests.
There are now 146 national forests, embracing 182,817.159 acres, of which a little over 86 per cent is public land.
The net increase in national forest area since the beginning of the fiscal year is 931,679 acres.
Small-holding claims.
During the past year 14 small-holding claims have been approved for patent.
The act of June 15, 1922 under which these claims are presented, expired by limitation on June 15, 1924, and new claims thereafter will be barred.
Private land claims.
Claims of this character continue to be a constant subject of inquiry by present owners relative to their status and by descendants of the original grantees.
During the year 25 claims were approved for patent.
Extension of time for payment on Indian lands.
Due to droughts for several years in the Northwestern States, resulting in crop failures, the requests for extensions of time for payment on homestead entries of ceded Indian lands have been constant.
Specific information as to action taken in cases of this character are furnished by the commissioner in his report.
Mineral lands.
During the year 502 mineral entries were approved for patent.
Three coal entries were approved for patent, covering 355.351 acres, based on rights initiated under the coal land laws prior to the enactment of the leasing act; 37 potash permits were issued under the potash leasing law, 25 permits under the sodium leasing law, and 8 phosphate leases were canceled.
Coal leases and permits.
One hundred and fifty coal-prospecting permits were issued during the year, having an aggregate of 147,- 114.62 acres; 78 coal leases covering an aggregate of 24,392.06 acres; and 9 licenses covering an aggregate of 381.75 acres.
Oil and gas activities.
Under section 14 of the general leasing act of February 25, 1920, 21 leases issued, covering 3,674.93 acres.
Under section 17 of the act authorizing the publie sale of leases, one lease was issued covering 163.48 acres, for which the Government received $7,163.48.
Under sections 13 and 20 of the act, prospecting permits were granted on 4,108 applications.
Receipts under the mineral leasing act.
Receipts of the Federal Government from bonuses, royalties, and rentals under the law providing for leases and mineral rights on the public domain aggregate $13,631,840.72.
Contests.
During the year 207 decisions were rendered in connection with forest lieu selections and 82 forest lieu selections were approved for patenting; and during the same period 546 litigated cases were disposed of and 1,057 unappealed cases were closed out, leaving the work of the division practically current.
Repayments.
Under the several acts governing repayment, there were stated during the last fiscal year 1,764 accounts allowing repayment of $99,896.42, and during the same period 1,105 claims for repayment were denied.
Patents and certified copies.
During the year 30,015 patents (including reissues), covering a total of 8,936,520.80 acres, were issued.
Approximately 60 per cent of the original patents was disposed of under the various homestead laws; 28,545 copies of patent records and 67,135 copies of other official records were furnished.
Alaska.
The commissioner's report deals at considerable length with conditions in Alaska, with suggestions as to needed legislation therefor.
Statistics relating to the public domain.
The commissioner suggests the advisability of legislative action authorizing the compilation and publication of an additional volume of the Public Domain (an Executive document issued in 1883), which will embrace the public land laws in operation and enacted since that period.
Indian health.
The promotion of health falls within the group of activities of paramount importance to Indian welfare.
The Indians are subject to the same diseases that afflict other people.
The difference in living conditions accounts largely for the difference in death rate.
As science overcomes the medicine man's practice and home sanitation increases, the difference between Indian and white mortality will diminish.
The two most prevalent Indian diseases, tuberculosis and trachoma, are gradually yielding to better hospitalization and other agencies at work for domestic improvement.
Special effort was made during the year to enroll children having trachoma in school, where facilities for treatment are better, and following a medical survey in several States, a trachoma campaign was organized for the current year, to cover the States of Arizona, and New Mexico, which will be pushed aggressively.
This will include the great Navajo country, where the urgent need exists, and will have the advisory cooperation of Dr. John McMullen of the United States Public Health Service, a nationally known trachoma expert, as well as the aid of local health bureaus and Red Cross organizations of those States.
There were many epidemics last year, but no direct fatalities were attributed to any reported.
Under recent appropriations arrangements are in progress for a new sanitorium at Onigum, Minn., a new hospital for the Chilocco School.
Okla., and from the $130,000 extra allowances for health work in 1925, $40,000 has been allotted for a sanitorium to occupy the abandoned plant of the Shawnee boarding school, Oklahoma.
It is hoped that like facilities for health needs at half a dozen other locations will be supplied in the near future, including an institution for crippled children, Plans were completed for a division of field welfare to be conducted by a supervisor of field nurses and field matrons for the systematic coordination of health work by these emplovees throughout the service.
Schools.
Attendance in Government schools last year was equal to capacity, except in localities where epidemics prevented.Appropriations for equipment and maintenance have not been as liberal as for increasing capacity, which has necessitated a slight shortening of the school term and in a number of instances has imposed insufficient supplies, owing to the continued high prices of nearly all essential lines.
On account of most home conditions, it would be better to lengthen rather than shorten the school year.
Public school atendance by Indian children has increased rapidly, as indicated by the unusually large expenditure for their tuition.
The results are satisfactory as to training and reduced cost to the Government.
Summer schools for retarded pupils.
About 700 children who failed to pass the regular examination at the close of June, 1923, attended summer sessions of from four to six weeks, and 80 per cent made their grades and were promoted.
These sessions were conducted at 20 boarding schools, where funds were available, without additional cost for instruction and at small expense for subsistence, as the schools generally at that season produced all vegetables needed.
These pupils, therefore, will complete their schooling practically a year sooner than they otherwise would at a saving to the Government of about $100,000, and their places will be filled that much sooner by other deserving children.
Lack of individual attention in large classes is a cause of retardation in many schools, and the summer session seems to be justified as a permanent feature.
Improvement of the teaching service.
The law allows not to exceed 30 days' educational leave per year, and the present policy is to require all instructors to attend a session of training school of not less than 30 days at least every other summer, which admits of a sufficient number not in attendance each year to furnish the instruction at summer sessions for backward pupils.
The attendance of teachers in summer schools for self-improvement has increased in three years from 25 to 325.
Reading circles maintained at all schools has also added notably to teaching efficiency.
Peculiar needs of the Navajos.
The Navajos must depend almost entirely on boarding schools, as they move with their flocks over an area that makes any but a movable day school inaccessible for more than a short period.
The sheep industry upon which they depend calls 'for some of their children to help with the sheep in all seasons.
A continuous session of boarding schools available for them would enable alternate attendance as between those who can be spared and those needed for the flocks, and thus go far toward meeting urgent needs.
This policy would require more money for support of schools, which it is believed would be fully justified by the results.
Supervisors' conference.
A conference in Washington of all school supervisors at the beginning of the year covered all policies and procedure of the Indian school system and established closer cooperation between the office and field service.
This meeting discussed the subject of Indian employment and outlined constructive plans for enlarged service of this kind, emphasizing special consideration and assistance to girl students and graduates.
Its recommendations also led to the organization of Junior Red Cross societies in nearly all Indian schools, which has already developed opportunities for rendering and receiving many benefits by Indian pupils and an extension of their service to homes and communities, with the promise of large individual and social gains.
Reclassification.
Under legislation for reclassification the Indian Service will acquire greater permanence and efficiency through a system of increased compensation, equalization of service, and incentive to promotion.
Higher standards and a better qualified personnel should follow.
Initial adjustments wherever impèrfect will be gradually corrected, and when this is effected reduction in the number of employees will be practicable.
Indian land interests.
During the year 642 allotments of land were made to individual Indians, embracing approximately 170,000 acres located on 15 reservations in 8 different States, besides 103 allotments covering about 14,500 acres on the public domain in various States.
Of allotments completed and awaiting approval, 1,171 were to Indians on the Fort Belknap ·Reservation, Mont., embracing about 550,000 acres, and 91 on the Kalispell Reservation, Wash.
Allotment work was also begun for the nonremoval Mille Lac Indians in Minnesota and on the mission reservations in California.
By order of the President, extension of the trust period was made on over 3,000 allotments in California, Oregon, South Dakota, and Oklahoma.
Three tracts, containing 190 acres, were purchased at a cost of $7,650 for homeless Indians in California.
Purchase of 800 acres of inherited lands was made, at a cost of $25,450, to supply home sites for 11 Fort Sill Apaches and their families in Oklahoma.
Field work was completed for individual allotments to about 180 Ute and Paiute Indians in Utah, formerly under the leadership of Old Posey and Polk.
Sales were made of 1,286 alotted tracts aggregating about 125,099 acres.
The number of approvals of fee patents and competency certificates was 913, covering 106,199 acres.
Important progress was effected in the Supreme Court of the United States for the recovery of swamp and overflowed lands in the States of Wisconsin and Minnesota to which reference was made last year.
Important legislation.
By the act of June 4, 1924, the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians of North Carolina is authorized to convey all its lands, moneys, and other properties to the United States in trust for individual allotment thereof and the Secretary of the Interior is empowered to make a new and final tribal roll.
This band owns about 60,000 acres.
Oklahoma; reserved additional lands for the Indians of the Zia Pueblo in Arizona, and the Paiute-Goshute Indians in Utah; authorized allotments to Indians on the Lac du Flambeau Reservation, Wis., and authorized an appropriation of $25,000 to purchase land for the Temoak Band in Nevada.
Jurisdictional bills authorizing the adjudication of the claims of some 12 different tribes or bands in the State of Oklahoma, Montana, Idaho, Washington, Wisconsin, and Michigan were enacted, and $85,000 was authorized to be appropriated for the relief of dispossessed allotted Indians on the Nesqually Reservation, Wash.
Indian farming and stock raising.
The agricultural and livestock activities of the Indians had a year of encouraging progress.
The industrial surveys started two years ago, followed by what is known as the five-year program, have accomplished much in awakening Índians to a self-supporting use of their resources and an improvement of home conditions.
Official reports show a larger acreage cultivated last year than ever before.
A general survey of the dairy industry resulted in the elimination of many unprofitable animals and the addition of·first-elass stoek.
The Navajo Indians asked for a sufficient number of high-grade rams to improve the grade of their sheep, to be paid for in cash or on the reimbursable plan, and the Indians of the Spokane Reservation, Wash., requested approval of a plan to dispose of their worthless horses and replace them with first-class cattle.
The pony type of horse is also becoming unpopular on other reservations.
Boys’ and girls’ clubs.
Club work for boys and girls has grown into a fine industrial adjunct through which children from 9 to 14 years of age are taking a lively interest in poultry, gardening, canning, bread making, sewing, corn, potatoes, and the livestock necessary to a prosperous home.
This work has been organized on 17 reservations with over 400 children enrolled.
The public school, now attended by many Indian children, is the point of contact and the work, projected by the county agent the same as for white children, is linked up with county and State fairs.
One Indian girl won prizes enough on canned goods to pay her tuition in high school for a year.
Boys and girls often attend lectures and demonstrations under the extension division of the Department of Agriculture cooperating with the State, and the outlook for this juvenile club work is very promising.
Fairs and exhibits.
As white settlements increase on and near the reservations and county fair associations are organized, the exclusively Indian fair is being discontinued because the advantages are much better to the Indian as an exhibitor on an equal basis with the whites.
The Indians are now winning many prizes at county and State fairs in open competition with all other exhibitors.
Roads and bridges.
The use of the 100 per cent Federal Aid has greatly advanced road work on Indian reservations and projects for such work has been approved for a total Federal aid of $2,766,449.
In cooperation with this aid special appropriations amounting to $109,500 were available last year for seven reservations.
Oil and gas.
Leases for oil and gas mining are sought in every State where restricted Indian lands are located, and oil fields are in operation on such lands in Oklahoma, Montana, Wyoming, and New Mexico.
The industry last year was below normal, owing to previous overproduction, but operations were fairly successful.
Nearly 226.910 acres were leased, the gross oil production was 49,- 640.458 barrels, and the revenue from existing leases was approximately $29,145,517.
On the Osage Reservation, Okla., leasings of 62.448 acres brought $16,457,000, one 160-acre tract bringing $1,- 990,000 and each of several others more than $1,000,000.
The total revenue to the Osage Indians from oil and gas leases was $24,670,483.
A sale of leases on unallotted lands of the Navajo Treaty Reservation, N. Mex., netted the Indians $80,598, and at the close of the vear eight oil wells were each producing from 20 to 1,200 barrels of oil per day.
On the Southern Ute Reservation, N. Mex., five exploratory leases were sold for a total bonus of $43,600.
Indian employment.
The year showed a steady gain in the number of Indians finding remunerative employment in agricultural, mechanical, and commercial pursuits.
The cotton fields of the Southwest attracted many, and the bureau's employment supervisor centered his efforts there, where the Indians in large numbers earned good wages as cotton pickers.
The vacation outing service of the larger schools is a growing factor in the introduction of the Indian youth to opportunities for later self-support in white communities.
Last vear the vacation wages of good-sized boys and girls from six of these schools were close to $110,000.
This work is carefully supervised and conducted under protective agreements between the school and employers.
Irrigation activities.
Irrigation work will be greatly advanced by the recent legislation authorizing the construction of a dam across the canvon of the Gila River near San Carlos, Ariz., estimated to cost $5,500,000, which will eventually be operated with the diversion dams at Sacaton and near Florence, Ariz., the former in progress and the latter completed, and much benefit will accrue to the allotted lands of the Pima Indians.
A successful beginning was made at Isleta last vear on the drainage systems for the several pueblos in New Mexico, and at Tesuque a submerged dam was constructed which promises relief by raising underground water to augment the supply for the Indians.
The drilling of wells to increase the supply of water for domestic, irrigation, and stock purposes on the Navajo and Hopi Reservations, N. Mex., was prosecuted with excellent results under the appropriation of $45,000, and will be continued in the present vear.
Steps were taken through the Department of Justice to secure better water privileges to the Indians in the Coachella Vallev, Calif., and on the Walker River Reservation, Nev.
Work has progressed very satisfactorily on the rehabili.
Practical features introduced in the construction, operation, and maintenance of the Flathead project, Montana, the administration of which was transferred last spring to the Indian Bureau, are expected to improve the situation there quite materially.
Work is being pushed under an appropriation made for payment of part of the expense assessable against Indian lands to be included in a district for the drainage of Indian and other lands on the ceded portion of the Wind River Reservation, Wyo., which upon completion will reclaim a considerable area of water-logged Indian lands now unfit for farming.
Work on the Wapato unit in the Yakima Reservation, Wash., was about completed, except the generating units and pumping plant, which will probably be finished in 1926, and will then make the Yakima project, serving 120,000 acres, one of the finest in the West.
Under the act of May 9.
1924, regulations approved by the department will afford important relief to water users through the deferring of payments of irrigation charges authorized by the act.
Citizenship.
In pursuance of the act approved June 4, 1924, extending citizenship to all noncitizen Indians born within the territorial limits of the United States, steps were taken to inform the Indians through field officials of their suffrage rights under State election laws and that their property rights will continue to be protected by the Government.
The liquor trafie and peyote.
The small number of special enforcement officers allowed under greatly reduced appropriations, in cooperation with superintendents and other emplovees, have obtained gratifying results in the liquor suppression service.
A bill was introduced in the present Congress against the use and sale of peyote, but has not yet become a law.
The National Antinarcotic Conference last year strongly urged prohibitory legislation respecting this drug, and public sentiment against traffic in it seems to be growing.
Forestry.
Income from timber cut last year on the Flathead Reservation, Mont., was approximately $250,000; on the Colville.
Spokane, Quinaielt, and Tulalip jurisdictions in Washington, nearly $500,000, and on the Klamath Reservation, Oreg.
In New Mexico, 20,352,720 feet of timber cut in the Jicarilla Reservation brought $77,283.61, and logging operations were begun on the Elk and Silver Creek unit of the Mescalero Reservation.
In Arizona 55,774,100 feet cut brought $3 per 1,000.
The principal operation in Wisconsin was the cutting of about 20,000,000 feet at the Menominee Indian Mills.
In the sale of 65,000,000 feet on the Flathead Reservation, Mont., vellow pine brought $4.87 per 1,000, and on four large units offered on the Klamath Reservation, Oreg.
A number of other important sales were made, and during the year special attention was given to the standardization of the records in forestry work at the various agencies to which employees actively responded.
Pueblo land titles.
Under the act of Congress approved June 7, 1924, the final adjustment of conflicting titles affecting lands claimed by the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico will undoubtedly be completed.
It seems most fortunate that this legislation was so generally indorsed by the friends of all parties in interest.
The Pueblo Land Board authorized by it, composed of the Secretary of the Interior, the Attorney General, and the President's appointee, who is Mr. Roberts Walker, of the New York bar, will investigate, determine, report, and describe the lands within the boundaries of any lands granted or confirmed to the Pueblo Indians by the United 'States, or any prior sovereignty, title to which the board shall find not to have been extinguished within the provisions of this act.
Upon the completion of the board's report as to each pueblo the Attorney General is required to institute a suit to quiet the title to the lands described therein as Indian lands, Indian title to which has not been extinguished as determined by the report.
Provision is also made for due compensation to the Indians for any lands or water rights lost by reason of nonaction by the Federal Government, and it may be expected that with little delay the long-standing controversies involving the legal and equitable rights of these Indians will be definitely settled.
Five Civilized Tribes.
In the Choctaw Nation no tribal property remains to be disposed of.
The remaining tribal property of the four other nations is valued at $13,146,432.99.
Under existing law the restricted period of approximately 17,500 of these Indians still under Government supervision will expire in 1931.
For improving the condition of this class $3,152,040.34 was expended last year for houses, barns, wells, and livestock.
Restrictions were removed from 474 Indians and conditionally from 441 tracts of land.
Enrollment in tribal and other schools reached 19,586, which was 77 per cent of the eligible enumeration.
The gross oil production for these tribes was 10,665,492.73 barrels, and their total income from oil and gas was $3,580,007.76.
Successful work was done by the Government probate attorneys, who appeared in 1,528 cases, removed 184 guardjans, conserved funds amounting to $207,437.99, and saved to minors $115.435.47.
Indian Service officials assisted in an investigation of the handling of Indian estates by guardians and administrators under State jurisdiction and upon reports submitted, legislation was sought with a view to restoring to the Federal Government the complete administration of these estates.
Quapaw lead and zinc mining lands.
Eleven leases made for lead and zinc mining covered about 1,900 acres, at higher than previous royalty rates.
Technical data furnished by a representative of the Bureau of Mines aided the Indian Office in determining the terms and conditions upon which leases should be made and the requirements for proper mining development.
Purchase of supplies.
There has been close adherence to the fixed policy of purchasing only standard grades of goods and supplies under rigid inspection.
The quality of coal has been determined by scientific analysis, and all fuel requirements were promptly met.
So far as practicable surplus property from other departments was utilized.
Heirship matters.
There were 2,125 heirship cases and 207 wills disposed of, and the fees collected and covered into the Treasury amounted to $71,000.
A graduated probate fee ranging from $20 to $75 is charged in this class of cases.
Number of pensioners.
There were on the roll at the end of the fiscal year 525,539 pensioners, a net loss to the roll of 14,217 from the total of 539,756 on the roll at the beginning of the year.
On June 30, 1924, there were 146,815 Civil War soldiers on the roll as against 168,623 on June 30, 1923, showing a decrease of 21,808.
The number of Civil War widows, minor children, and dependents in receipt of pension on June 30, 1924, was 253,136, and on June 30, 1923, the number was 264,580, a decrease of 11,444.
The number of deaths of Civil War soldiers in the fiscal year 1924 was 21,854 as against 25,452 in 1923; and deaths of Civil War widows, minor children, and dependents in 1924 numbered 21,296 as against 23,974 in 1923.
The highest number of Civil War soldiers on the roll was in 1898, when there were 745,822.
The highest number of Civil War widows on the roll was in 1912, when there were 304,373.
The number of Spanish War soldiers on the roll June 30, 1924, was 85,038 as against 68,393 on June 30, 1923, an increase to the roll of 16,645.
The number of widows, minor children, and dependents of Spanish War soldiers on the roll June 30, 1924, was 16,104 as against 13,167 on June 30, 1923, an increase of 1,937.
Of the War of 1812, at the close of this fiscal year 33 widows were still in receipt of pension.
Of the War with Mexico, there were 31 soldiers and 1,437 widows on the roll June 30, 1924.
On account of service prior to 1891 in various Indian wars, 3,893 soldiers and 2,937 widows were in receipt of pension on June 30, 1924.
For disabilities of service origin in the Regular Establishment, 12,283 soldiers were on the roll June 30, 1924; and for deaths of soldiers due to service causes, 3,754 widows were in receipt of pension.
By classes, the pension roll showed at the close of this fiscal year 248,049 soldiers, 270,194 widows, 2,263 minor children, 939 helpless children, and 67 Army nurses.
Unexpended balances of appropriations.
For Army and Navy pensions, $23,125,719.28.
For per diem and expenses of special examiners, $2,876.98.
For salaries of employees, $146,064.25.
For administration of retirement act, $2,964.50.
Disbursements for pensions.
The amount disbursed for pensions for the fiscal year 1924 was $229,994,777 as against $263,012,500 for 1923.
The amount appropriated for the payment of pensions for 1924 was $253,000,000 as against $268,000,000 for 1923.
The number of pensioners residing in foreign countries last year was 2,911 and the amount paid to these pensioners was $1,104,903.
Certificates issued and applications filed.
During the past fiscal year there were issued on admitted claims 61,096 pension certificates; as reissues in lieu of lost certificates, 907; accrued pension orders, 10,842; and reimbursement orders, 3,566.
The amount allowed as reimbursement of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners was $168.071.24.
There were received during the year 115,825 claims of all kinds.
Of the 166,492 claims before the bureau for action in the past fiscal year, 115,089 were disposed of, leaving a balance on hand June 30, 1924, of 51,403.
Of the claims disposed of, 36,578 were based on Civil War service and 56,280 on Spanish War service.
The total number of claims before the bureau for action in the past three years was 456,955, of which 405.552 were disposed of.
Three years ago the work was badly in arrears and as a result there was widespread dissatisfaction with the bureau; at the close of this fiscal year the work in all its phases is current and those having dealings with the bureau express satisfaction for prompt service and liberal treatment.
The number of pension claims allowed since the establishment of the pension system has been as follows: Original claims of soldiers and sailors, 1,400,381; reissue and increase claims, 3,959,091; claims of widows, minor children, and dependents, 1,142,789; total of all claims, 6,502,261.
The total amount paid to pensioners from 1790 to 1924, inclusive, has been $6,836,351,398.86.
Monthly payment of pensions.
Effective September 4, 1922, pensions have been paid monthly.
Under the system of disbursements in operation resident pensioners of the United States receive their checks on the fourth day of each month.
The disbursing clerk for the Bureau of Pensions pays not only pensions but annuities and refunds under the retirement law, and fees and expenses of examining surgeons.
In the past fiscal year there were issued 6,577,171 checks, carrying payments aggregating $239,004,814.43.
Jurisdiction of Pension Bureau.
The World War veterans' aet, 1924," provides relief for persons disabled and for dependents of those who died of a disability suffered in the military service of the United States between April 6, 1917, and July 2, 1921.
Claims of soldiers based on disability originating in line of duty in the military service of the United States prior to April 6, 1917, or after July 2, 1921, and of widows, minor children, and dependents of soldiers on account of death as a result of disability suffered in the military service prior to April 6, 1917, or after July 2, 1921, will be the subject of examination and adjudication in the Pension Bureau.
This new law further provides that “the receipt of a gratuity, pension, or compensation by widow, or parent, on account of the death of any person shall not bar the payment of compensation on account of the death of another person.
It further provides a sum not exceeding $100 for burial expenses of a veteran of any war if such expenses are not otherwise provided for.
The hospital facilities under the control and jurisdiction of the Veterans' Bureau are made available by this new law for honorably discharged veterans of the Spanish-American War, the Philippine insurrection, and the Boxer rebellion under certain prescribed conditions.
Veterans desiring information as to hospitalization are advised to apply to the head of the district or subdistrict office of the Veterans' Bureau nearest to place of residence.
Permanent memorial and war museum.
The fast thinning line of the veterans of the Civil War prompts the suggestion that the Pension Office Building, which was designed and erected as a tribute to the men who bore the brunt of battle in our wars, and especially the great Civil War, should be made a great memorial, a lasting museum of our Nation's wars, in which will be housed not only the intimate history of the men who participated in them, as set forth in the 4,000,000 pension claims now in the files of the bureau, but also exhibits of accouterments, implements, and other relics of those wars.
Thus the structure authorized, designed, builded, and dedicated as a war memorial would become one of the great attractions of the Nation's Capital and an inspiration to future generations.
Departmental decisions.
Four important departmental decisions were rendered in the past fiscal year.
One gave a broader and more liberal construction of the term“ vicious habits" used in the act of June 5, 1920. In another it was held that a determination made under a construction of law that obtained at time of adjudication shall be accepted as“res adjudicata."
The meaning of“bounty" and “ gratuity" as used in the joint resolution of July 1, 1902, was defined in another decision.
The doctrine of constructive discharge at the end of a war which has long been followed in pension practice is held in another decision to be without warrant and will, therefore, no longer be followed.
Administration of retirement act.
During the past fiscal year the work of adjudication of claims under the retirement act was practically current.
Of the 50,027 claims of all classes before the bureau for action, 49,040 were disposed of, leaving 987 pending claims on June 30, 1924.
The balance in the civil-service retirement and disability fund on June 30, 1923, was $25,510,288.97.
During the fiscal year there was added to the fund as deductions from salaries of classified civilservice employees $15,109,451.49, and as interest, profits, and miscellaneous items $1,523,034.44, making a total in the fund of $42,142,- 774.90.
The disbursements for the year on account of annuities were $5,692,443.59 and on account of refunds (including $144,127.42 interest) $2,864,138.12, a total of $8,556,581.12, leaving a surplus in the fund on June 30, 1924, of $33,586,193.19.
The appropriation for the cost of administration of the retirement act for 1924 was $68,940; total expenditures, $65,975.50, leaving an unexpended balance of $2,964.50.
During the past fiscal year a Retirement Act Handbook was compiled, containing abstracts of decisions and opinions, rules of procedure, various Executive orders, and the text of the original act and amendments.
This publication has been helpful as a book of reference to officers of the Government concerned in the administration of the retirement laws.
The necessity is stressed of the preparation and upkeep of the "needful tables and records" required by section 13 of the retirement act" as a guide for future valuations and adjustments of the plan for the retirement of employees under this act."
As the Board of Actuaries must shortly make the five-year valuation of the "civilservice retirement and disability fund" required by section 16 of the act the lack of adequate records on which to base estimates will be a serious handicap to the board.
The number of annuitants on the roll June 30, 1924, was 10,548.
Of those now on the roll, 8,895 have been retired for age and 1,653 for disability.
Since August 1, 1920, there has been deducted from the salaries of employees of the Government to whom the retirement act applies $56,012,410.23, which amount has earned to June 30, 1924, in interest and investment, profits $3,225,923.34, making the fund total to close of this fiscal year $59,238,333.57.
Out of it a total of $17,435,272.92 has been paid for annuities and $8,176,057.20 for refunds to persons whose services with the Government have terminated, making the total disbursements to close of the past fiscal year $25,611,330.12.
The year closing June 30 has been one of unprecedented activity in the Patent Office.
Although the number of applications for patents, designs, and trade-marks has slightly decreased from the preceding year, or from 100,724 to 99,503, the total net receipts from all sources amounted to $3,042,276.22, the largest amount ever received in the Patent Office for any one year.
Reduction in arrears.
The great activity in the Patent Office is shown by the reduction in the amount of work awaiting official action.
There are now on hand 12,000 fewer patent cases than there were a year ago, 2,469 fewer design cases, and 1,850 fewer trademark cases, showing a decrease in the work on hand of over 16,000 cases for the year.
Applications were also acted upon more promptly.
Thus, one year ago there were only 4 divisions under 6 months—now there are 25: one year ago there were only 7 under 7 months—now there are 40: one year ago there were only 10 under 8 months—now all 49 divisions are under 8 months.
In fact, one year ago there were 39 divisions over 8 months and 29 divisions over 9 months in arrears.
The 49 technical divisions have caught up in their work on an average of about 3 months per division.
The design and trade-mark divisions have also caught up with their work, each division now being under 30 days instead of being 412 and 91/2 months, respectively, in arrears.
Reorganization.
The Public Building Commission has placed at the disposal of the Patent Office about 70 rooms in the old Land Office Building across the street from the Patent Office.
In view of this the Patent Office is undergoing a thorough reorganization which will make for greater efficiency.
Copies of patents.
The Patent Office sold 2,568,865 copies of patents for 10 cents each, bringing in $256,886.
Three hundred and thirty-five thousand eight hundred and eightythree photostats and 98,288 photographic copies of patents and other papers were furnished.
After allowing for all expenses, $25,000 profit was made from the sale of the photostat copies.
Output increasing.
The number of patents, resissues, designs, trade-marks, labels and prints increased from 56,021, in 1923, to 59,853 for the past year.
Committee to study Patent Office.
The committee which is to study the Patent Office procedure is to be composed of representatives nominated by the American Bar Association, the United States Chamber of Commerce, National Association of Patent Lawyers.
Every facility and opportunity will be offered this committee to make an entirely independent study of Patent Office procedure.
Fraudulent attorneys.
The report calls attention to the fact that unregistered attorneys and attorneys who have been disbarred for gross misconduct are practicing in at least eight widely scattered cities.
These unregistered attorneys impose upon inventors, who would not entrust their secrets to them if they knew they were not registered.
These unregistered attorneys have also been practicing under fictitious names and under the names of companies or corporations.
Representative Cramton, of Michigan, has introduced a bill, known as H. R. 5790, which will permit the United States courts to prevent this fraudulent practice.
It is urgently recommended that this bill be passed.
The organization and functions of the bureau have not materially changed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1924.
The Commissioner of Education reports that the removal of the bureau from the Pension Office Building to the Interior Department Building, on November 1, 1923, has increased in a marked degree the efficiency and morale of the staff because of the superior adaptability and more attractive appearance of the space now occupied.
The transfer of quarters he further states has distinctly improved the facilities of cooperation between the Bureau of Education and the Department of the Interior and other bureaus and offices in the department because of proximity and convenience.
The bureau collects and disseminates information on educational problems.
The greater part of this work is accomplished through the bulletins and circulars which are issued from time to time.
Part of these are the result of researches made by members of the staff and part are the result of studies undertaken by persons not connected with the bureau.
In the promotion of education members of the bureau's staff are called upon to inspect schools and colleges, to address educational meetings and conventions, to hold conferences with educational leaders in the several fields, and to conduct educational surveys.
Owing to the limited travel funds of the bureau much of the field service can be undertaken only when the expenses of travel and subsistence are paid by educational administrators and educational associations.
During the fiscal year 23 members of the bureau's staff, exclusive of the commissioner, rendered an aggregate of 883 days of field service outside of the District of Columbia in 31 different States.
During the year the commissioner traveled 58,140 miles; spent 173 days in the field, including Sundays: conducted four national educational conferences; and in collaboration with the General Federation of Women's Clubs, the National Education Association, and the American Legion, conducted a national conference on illiteracy.
He addressed 16 national associations, ± regional associations, and 19 State associations, besides making many addresses before institutions of higher education, business organizations, and the like.
The National Conference on Illiteracy, held in the auditorium of the Department of the Interior on January 11-14, 1924, was well attended and attracted wide attention on the part of educators, the daily press, and the public generally.
Many noted speakers addressed the conference.
The program was comprehensive and suggestive, and doubtless results of a construetive character will flow from this meeting.
The bureau prepared an exhibit of educational material, consisting of maps, charts, models, graphs, etc., showing the status and progress of education in the United States, which was displayed in the Interior Department Building during the session of the National Education Association, at Washington, in July, 1924.
Other bureaus of the department cooperated with the Bureau of Education in this exhibit and made elaborate displays of their educational activities.
The bureau has been invited to undertake these surveys because its representatives are completely detached from any local interest, and, at the same time, possess extended experience and knowledge which are of great value for this purpose.
On the other hand, the bureau has been careful to request the assistance of well-known educators who are familiar with all the practical situations which call for discussion.
These surveys to a very appreciable extent stimulate education in the various States.
Owing to limited resources, the bureau has been able to respond to only a small proportion of the invitations for surveys which have come to it.
Division of higher education.
This division conducted three surveys, as follows: State system of higher education of Massachusetts, general conditions relating to higher education in Tennessee, and higher education in Cleveland, Ohio.
The field work of the Massachusetts survey was accomplished in 1923 and a fact-finding report was submitted to the State Survey Commission, appointed by the governor, on December 26, 1923.
The commission recommended the establishment of a State system of junior colleges.
The survey report was printed as a legislative document by the State of Massachusetts.
The state-wide survey of higher education in Tennessee, undertaken at the invitation of the Tennessee College Association, is in progress.