To the Congress of the United States: The present state of the Union, upon which it is customary for the President to report to the Congress under the provisions of the Constitution, is such that it may be regarded with encouragement and satisfaction by every American.
Our country is almost unique in its ability to discharge fully and promptly all its obligations at home and abroad, and provide for all its inhabitants an increase in material resources, in intellectual vigor and in moral power.
The Nation holds a position unsurpassed in all former human experience.
This does not mean that we do not have any problems.
It is elementary that the increasing breadth of our experience necessarily increases the problems of our national life.
But it does mean that if all will but apply ourselves industriously and honestly, we have ample powers with which to meet our problems and provide for I heir speedy solution.
I do not profess that we can secure an era of perfection in human existence, but we can provide an era of peace and prosperity, attended with freedom and justice and made more and more satisfying by the ministrations of the charities and humanities of life.
Our domestic problems are for the most part economic.
We have our enormous debt to pay, and we are paying it.
We have the high cost of government to diminish, and we are diminishing it.
We have a heavy burden of taxation to reduce, and we are reducing it.
But while remarkable progress has been made in these directions, the work is yet far from accomplished.
We still owe over $21,000,000,000, the cost of the National Government is still about $3,500,000,000, and the national taxes still amount to about $27 for each one of our inhabitants.
There yet exists this enormous field for the application of economy.
In my opinion the Government can do more to remedy the economic ills of the people by a system of rigid economy in public expenditure than can be accomplished through any other action.
The costs of our national and local governments combined now stand at a sum close to $100 for each inhabitant of the land.
A little less than one-third of this is represented by national expenditure, and a little more than two-thirds by local expenditure.
It is an ominous fact that only the National Government is reducing its debt.
Others are increasing theirs at about $1,000,000,000 each year.
The depression that overtook business, the disaster experienced in agriculture, the lack of employment and the terrific shrinkage in all values which our country experienced in a most acute form in 1920, resulted in no small measure from the prohibitive taxes which were then levied on all productive effort.
The establishment of a system of drastic economy in public expenditure, which has enabled us to pay off about one-fifth of the national debt since 1919, and almost cut in two the national tax burden since 1921, has been one of the main causes in reestablishing a prosperity which has come to include within its benefits almost every one of our inhabitants.
Economy reaches everywhere.
It carries a blessing to everybody.
The fallacy of the claim that the costs of government are borne by the rich and those who make a direct contribution to the National Treasury can not be too often exposed.
No system has been devised, I do not think any system could be devised, under which any person living in this country could escape being affected by the cost of our government.
It has a direct effect both upon the rate and the purchasing power of wages.
It is felt in the price of those prime necessities of existence, food, clothing, fuel and shelter.
It would appear to be elementary that the more the Government expends the more it must require every producer to contribute out of his production to the Public Treasury, and the less he will have for his own benefit.
The continuing costs of public administration can be met in only one way -- by the work of the people.
The higher they become, the more the people must work for the Government.
The less they are, the more the people can work for themselves.
The present estimated margin between public receipts and expenditures for this fiscal year is very small.
Perhaps the most important work that this session of the Congress can do is to continue a policy of economy and further reduce the cost of government, in order that we may have a reduction of taxes for the next fiscal year.
Nothing is more likely to produce that public confidence which is the forerunner and the mainstay of prosperity, encourage and enlarge business opportunity with ample opportunity for employment at good wages, provide a larger market for agricultural products, and put our country in a stronger position to be able to meet the world competition in trade, than a continuing policy of economy.
Of course necessary costs must be met, proper functions of the Government performed, and constant investments for capital account and reproductive effort must be carried on by our various departments.
But the people must know that their Government is placing upon them no unnecessary burden.
TAXES Everyone desires a reduction of taxes, and there is a great preponderance of sentiment in favor of taxation reform.
When I approved the present tax law, I stated publicly that I did so in spite of certain provisions which I believed unwise and harmful.
One of the most glaring of these was the making public of the amounts assessed against different income-tax payers.
Although that damage has now been done, I believe its continuation to be detrimental To the public welfare and bound to decrease public revenues, so that it ought to be repealed.
Anybody can reduce taxes, but it is not so easy to stand in the gap and resist the passage of increasing appropriation bills which would make tax reduction impossible.
It will be very easy to measure the strength of the attachment to reduced taxation by the power with which increased appropriations are resisted.
If at the close of the present session the Congress has kept within the budget which I propose to present, it will then be possible to have a moderate amount of tax reduction and all the tax reform that the Congress may wish for during the next fiscal year.
The country is now feeling the direct stimulus which came from the passage of the last revenue bill, and under the assurance of a reasonable system of taxation there is every prospect of an era of prosperity of unprecedented proportions.
But it would be idle to expect any such results unless business can continue free from excess profits taxation and be accorded a system of surtaxes at rates which have for their object not the punishment of success or the discouragement of business, but the production of the greatest amount of revenue from large incomes.
I am convinced that the larger incomes of the country would actually yield more revenue to the Government if the basis of taxation were scientifically revised downward.
Moreover the effect of the present method of this taxation is to increase the cost of interest.
on productive enterprise and to increase the burden of rent.
It is altogether likely that such reduction would so encourage and stimulate investment that it would firmly establish our country in the economic leadership of the world.
WATERWAYS Meantime our internal development should go on.
Provision should be made for flood control of such rivers as the Mississippi and the Colorado, and for the opening up of our inland waterways to commerce.
Consideration is due to the project of better navigation from the Great Lakes to the Gulf.
Every effort is being made to promote an agreement with Canada to build the, St. Lawrence waterway.
There are pending before the Congress bills for further development of the Mississippi Basin, for the taking over of the Cape Cod Canal in accordance with a moral obligation which seems to have been incurred during the war, and for the improvement of harbors on both the Pacific and the Atlantic coasts.
While this last should be divested of some of its projects and we must proceed slowly, these bills in general have my approval.
Such works are productive of wealth and in the long run tend to a reduction of the tax burden.
RECLAMATION Our country has a well defined policy of reclamation established under statutory authority.
This policy should be continued and made a self-sustaining activity administered in a manner that will meet local requirements and bring our and lands into a profitable state of cultivation as fast as there is a market for their products.
Legislation is pending based on the report of the Fact Finding Commission for the proper relief of those needing extension of time in which to meet their payments on irrigated land, and for additional amendments and reforms of our reclamation laws, which are all exceedingly important and should be enacted at once.
No more important development has taken place in the last year than the beginning of a restoration of agriculture to a prosperous condition.
We must permit no division of classes in this country, with one occupation striving to secure advantage over another.
Each must proceed under open opportunities and with a fair prospect of economic equality.
The Government can not successfully insure prosperity or fix prices by legislative fiat.
Every business has its risk and its times of depression.
It is well known that in the long run there will be a more even prosperity and a more satisfactory range of prices under the natural working out of economic laws than when the Government undertakes the artificial support of markets and industries.
Still we can so order our affairs, so protect our own people from foreign competition, so arrange our national finances, so administer our monetary system, so provide for the extension of credits, so improve methods of distribution, as to provide a better working machinery for the transaction of the business of the Nation with the least possible friction and loss.
The Government has been constantly increasing its efforts in these directions for the relief and permanent establishment of agriculture on a sound and equal basis with other business.
It is estimated that the value of the crops for this harvest year may reach $13,000,000,000, which is an increase of over $3,000,000,000 in three years.
It compares with $7,100,000,000 in 1913, arid if we make deduction from the figures of 1924 for the comparatively decreased value of the dollar, the yield this year still exceeds 1913 in purchasing power by over $1,000,000,000, and in this interval there has been no increase in the number of farmers.
Mostly by his own effort the farmer has decreased the cost of production.
A marked increase in the price of his products and some decrease in the price of his supplies has brought him about to a parity with the rest of the Nation.
The crop area of this season is estimated at 370,000,000 acres, which is a decline of 3,000,000 acres from last year, and 6,000,000 acres from 1919.
This has been a normal and natural application of economic laws, which has placed agriculture on a foundation which is undeniably sound and beginning to be satisfactory.
A decrease in the world supply of wheat has resulted in a very large increase in the price of that commodity.
The position of all agricultural products indicates a better balanced supply, but we can not yet conclude that agriculture is recovered from the effects of the war period or that it is permanently on a prosperous basis.
The cattle industry has not yet recovered and in some sections has been suffering from dry weather.
Every effort must be made both by Government activity and by private agencies to restore and maintain agriculture to a complete normal relationship with other industries.
It was on account of past depression, and in spite of present more encouraging conditions, that I have assembled an Agricultural Conference made up of those who are representative of this great industry in both its operating and economic sides.
Everyone knows that the great need of the farmers is markets.
The country is not suffering on the side of production.
Almost the entire difficulty is on the side of distribution.
This reaches back, of course, to unit costs and diversification, and many allied subjects.
It is exceedingly intricate, for our domestic and foreign trade, transportation and banking, and in fact our entire economic system, are closely related to it.
In time for action at this session, I hope to report to the Congress such legislative remedies as the conference may recommend.
An appropriation should be made to defray their necessary expenses.
MUSCLE SHOALS The production of nitrogen for plant food in peace and explosives in war is more and more important.
It is one of the chief sustaining elements of life.
It is estimated that soil exhaustion each year is represented by about 9,000,000 tons and replenishment by 5,450,000 tons.
The deficit of 3,550,000 tons is reported to represent the impairment of 118,000,000 acres of farm lands each year.
To meet these necessities the Government has been developing a water power project at Muscle Shoals to be equipped to produce nitrogen for explosives and fertilizer.
It is my opinion that the support of agriculture is the chief problem to consider in connection with this property.
It could by no means supply the present needs for nitrogen, but it would help and its development would encourage bringing other water powers into like use.
Several offers have been made for the purchase of this property.
Probably none of them represent final terms.
Much costly experimentation is necessary to produce commercial nitrogen.
For that reason it is a field better suited to private enterprise than to Government operation.
I should favor a sale of this property, or long-time lease, tinder rigid guaranties of commercial nitrogen production at reasonable prices for agricultural use.
There would be a surplus of power for many years over any possibility of its application to a developing manufacture of nitrogen.
It may be found advantageous to dispose of the right to surplus power separately with such reservations as will allow its gradual withdrawal and application to nitrogen manufacture.
A subcommittee of the Committees on Agriculture should investigate this field and negotiate with prospective purchasers.
If no advantageous offer be made, the development should continue and the plant should be dedicated primarily to the production of materials for the fertilization of the soil.
RAILWAYS The railways during the past year have made still further progress in recuperation from the war, with large rains in efficiency and ability expeditiously to handle the traffic of the country.
