Washington, D. C., November 20, 1925.
Sır: I have the honor to transmit herewith my annual report on the operations of the Interior Department for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1925.
The Government is an impersonal employer.
There is no mentor for official acts except public opinion, no safeguard against errors of judgment except detail knowledge, and no rewards except conscience.
Precedent for procedure may be either good or bad, but the one paralyzant to initiative in Government service is the.
The temptation is great to purchase official popularity through complaisance in the expenditure of public funds.
The Government administrator who promises, trusting to time or circumstances to relieve him of the obligation, gains immediate applause, but he speculates with his integrity of.purpose.
Government service should be regarded as an ethical profession.
It should not enlist those ambitious to acquire wealth.
Its material compensation is fixed by statute, but its lasting rewards come through the spirit of service.
The administrators of the Interior Department's, affairs are trustees of public and trust funds.
Their moral obligations are limited only by their number and measured by their magnitude.
Efforts for efficiency and economy, each necessary to the other, have been stressed by bureau chiefs in this department during the last year as never before, and their industry and loyalty have not wavered.
Reduction in appropriations for Interior Department for fiscal year 1924 as compared to 1923..
Reduction in appropriations for Interior Department for fiscal year 1925 less than 1924.
Total saving in administrative expenses for two-year period (1924–25)....
The department is operating with 2,013 less permanent employees than in 1923, with an average annual wage saving of approximately $3,700,000, although our salaries were increased $1,850,000 by the reclassification act.
Reduction of forces in the department was largely effected by not filling vacancies and by reassignment of duties.
Each bureau has contributed to this economy.
All of them will have been reviewed and reorganized by the end of this calendar year by a corps of expert coordinators selected from within the department.
The Bureau of Mines, the Patent Office, and the Mineral Resources Division of the Geological Survey were transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Commerce during the past fiscal year by Executive order.
Based on the organic law creating the Commerce Department, which gives the President authority to transfer at his discretion scientific or statistic bureaus in other branches of the Government to that department, the fundamental purpose of the shifting of the bureaus was to remove an overlapping of functions and discontinue unnecessary expense.
Merging of Indian Office inspectors, pensien examiners, Land Office special agents, mineral examiners, timber cruisers and auditors into an inspection force, with the uniform title of inspector, stressing their duties as administrative rather than inquisitorial and punitive, was effected.
A complaint division, open directly to any employee of the service, has been set up in this branch.
By direct methods it makes possible the curing of irregularities reported by those whose complaints might not otherwise reach the Secretary.
The Department of the Interior is primarily the land branch of the Federal Government.
The majority of the bureaus and services under its jurisdiction perform functions connected with the disposal, development, conservation and administration of the public domain.
Other bureaus supervise educational, eleemosynary, legal, and financial responsibilities of the Government.
The Government, since its formation, has maintained a generous policy in disposing of public lands to its citizens.
Liberal homestead laws were enacted by Congress after the nation came into possession of the vast areas comprising the present Western States.
They have remained on the statute books ever since.
The pioneer movement commencing over half a century ago resulted in the settlement of the West.
The fertile lands have now passed into private ownership.
The public land remaining after years of intensive homesteading may be regarded as valueless for agriculture.
This diminishing area of the public domain caused a gradual reduction in the work of the General Land Office.
This bureau was found to be operating with practically the same force it had maintained during periods of greater activity.
A reorganization of the working force became necessary.
A consolidation of divisions in Washington, the retirement of surplus employees, and the discarding of useless furniture during the past fiscal year, resulted in a closer knit organization and expedited the service.
A reduction in the number of land entries naturally followed the shrinkage of the public domain.
Receipts from sales of public lands decreased 85 per cent during the past 20 years.
This suggested the closing of 42 of the 84 land offices, which was done at the close of the last fiscal year, the work being transferred to other offices.
The.
The 12 offices of surveyors general were abolished at the close of the fiscal year under law passed during the last session of Congress, upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of the General Land Office and the Secretary of the Interior.
A complete reorganization of the field surveying work of that bureau resulted after the close of the fiscal year.
All the activities formerly assigned to the surveyors general were transferred to the field surveying service.
The saving accomplished in the administration of the public domain by the reorganization of the General Land Office in Washington, the consolidation of local land offices, and the discontinuance of the offices of surveyors general, amounts to over half a million dollars annually.
Grazing.
A change in the Federal policy which will secure the permanent preservation of pasturage on the remaining public domain is imperative for the protection of the range and of stockmen.
The national forests, which now embrace 184,125,912 acres, are under the control of the Department of Agriculture, and offer grazing privileges under lease to permittees.
The unreserved public lands, comprising 184,726,846 additional acres, are under the Department of the Interior, and are now being utilized for grazing under sufferance, without charge or control, by the Federal Government.
This gratuitous use of the public domain as an unrestricted range for livestock has resulted in overgrazing.
Wide areas have been almost denuded of native grasses.
Close grazing precludes reseeding by natural process to reproduce this important natural resource.
There is no limit under the law to the number of animals that may be grazed on the prairies regardless of the growth of grass available.
Forage for domestic livestock is being consumed by countless wild horses—unbranded, many unowned and of little value.
The Interior Department is without authority to eliminate this pest.
The watering places are inclosed by local owners, which enables them to control large grazing regions on the public lands.
Insecurity of tenure to the lands and inability of stock growers to prevent migratory herds from damaging the public domain are continual sources of trouble.
Altogether, the present lack of a grazing policy is a disturbing factor in the livestock business of the West.
Enactment of legislation authorizing the establishment by presidential proclamation of grazing districts and the issuance of permits therefor to bona fide residents of the locality, or to those engaged in the livestock industry in the areas affected, is urgently needed.
These districts could then be protected and administered by the Federal Government.
Such a policy would conserve the forage on public lands, and ultimately increase their value.
Stockmen having permits for fixed areas of the public domain could take precaution to allow reseeding and self-interest would prevent overgrazing.
With a legal tenure of the land for a term of years permittees would be encouraged to invest capital in wells and protect and develop water holes.
Fees to cover the actual cost of administration of these privileges should be exacted.
The surplus, if any from this source, should be divided between the Federal Treasury and the State in which the lands are located.
This system would not interfere with the continued utilization of mineral resources on public lands and would still permit homestead entry on the few suitable remaining tracts.
A bill to accomplish this object was before Congress last year, but failed of passage.
It is recommended that this legislation be enacted at the coming session of Congress to protect the grazing privileges of stockmen, to stabilize the livestock business of the Western States, and to preserve the remaining public domain from ultimate destruction.
Homestead laws.
The history of the disposal of the public lands has been a progressive liberalizing of the homestead laws to meet the diminution of fertile areas.
Originally, the size of the homestead was fixed at 160 acres.
After the greater part of the desirable public domain had been acquired by citizens and converted into farms of this size the demand for homesteads decreased.
There was no incentive for citizens to homestead the remaining public lands, as available 160-acre tracts would not sustain a family.
The size of the homestead consequently was increased by law to 320 acres.
Applications for homestead entries after a time again declined for the same reason.
In 1916 Congress enacted the stock-raising act, which permits the acquisition of public land in 640-acre tracts.
It was thought that these tracts were of sufficient size for the raising of sheep and cattle.
Stock raising on a tract limited to 640 acres is not practicable and homesteads for stock raising are rapidly reverting to the open range.
The Government has been criticized because it invites its citizens to enter public lands of this character, invest their small savings in an effort to develop them, only to find that they have wasted their time and capital in a fruitless struggle against insurmountable conditions.
The attention of Congress is called to this phase of the public land situation in the hope that consideration will be given to the repeal of the homestead stock-raising act.
Theremaining grazing lands can be otherwise administered with greater advantage to the Government and the stockman.
Timber preservation.
The conservation of the timber resources of the United States has been a subject of vital concern for years.
At the present rate of consumption the country will soon be confronted with a timber famine.
The Governor of Washington predicts that the timber in his State will be exhausted in 20 years.
The value of timber sold from public lands, in 1925, was $817,952.19, the total receipts for the past 10 years amounting to $4,108,529.46.
With the disappearing of the Nation's supply, all available lands containing timber stands, whether large or small, should engage the attention of the Congress.
The timber and stone act, which provides for the outright sale of public timber land, was passed by Congress almost 50 years ago—long prior to the adoption of the national forest policy.
Abuses have occurred in the past under its operation.
Tracts of valuable timber have been disposed of at $2.50 per acre.
Large areas of the public domain passed into private ownership have been cut over, and are being resold to the Government under the Weeks Act.
In addition to the 184,000,000 acres of public lands reserved as national forests, under the supervision of the Department of Agriculture, there are scattered tracts containing scant stands of timber still on the public domain, under the Interior Department, that have not been included in the national forests.
Čomplete ownership of these tracts, in areas not exceeding 160 acres, may be acquired by private citizens, at a minimum price of $2.50 per acre under the timber and stone act.
In 1908 a new system intended to end the exploitation of public property under the liberal provisions of the timber and stone act was adopted by the Government.
Timber cruisers made field examinations of the tracts and appraised the stand of timber on them, with the result that the Government received in nearly all cases the market value of the "ripe" timber.
In 1922 even more rigid regulations were put into effect, the appraisal including a separate valuation of each kind of timber, with an independent appraisement of the land itself.
This method of disposing of the timber lands on the public domain has checked speculation at the expense of the Government, but the timber itself is not being preserved.
As soon as it passes into private ownership the marketable timber is usually cut and sold, young growth damaged, and brush left as a fire menace.
While the timber on the present areas is scattered and of minor value, such forest cover as exists is valuable for the protection of water supply, prevention of erosion, and in some cases would in time become more valuable through natural growth and probable higher timber prices.
The section of the timber and stone act relating to timber is now obsolete, the necessity for its operation having long passed, and should, I believe, be repealed, the leasing or sale of stone deposits to be continued.
The Government is the owner of approximately 1,560,000 acres of valuable timber land in the State of Oregon, containing 42,000,000,- 000 feet b.
The timber upon these lands is now subject to disposition by the Secretary of the Interior under the act of June 9, 1916.
Outside of the areas included within existing national forests, and those held in large blocks in private ownership estimated at 371,000,000 acres, this body of timber constitutes the largest and most valuable in the United States.
The law makes provision for payment of $2.50 per acre to the railroad and wagon-road companies out of the receipts from the sale of this land and timber, and of payment of a percentage of the balance to the county in which the lands are situated.
I believe Congress should authorize discontinuing the sale of all Government-owned standing timber on public lands for a 10-year period.
In Oregon this plan would defer temporarily the amount going to the railroad and wagon-road companies and the counties from timber not yet sold.
The increased receipts which would accrue from later handling of the timber and resources would, however, more than compensate counties and others for this delay in disposition.
Indian timber.
There are approximately 6,500,000 acres of Indian tribal lands containing timber valued at $100,000,000.
Last year the receipts from the sale of ripe timber from this source amounted to a little less than $2,000,000.
A strict policy of conservation is followed in the disposition of these timber reservations in the interest of the Indians who own the property.
Timber is not sold until it is mature, the land is not included in the sale but is retained in the ownership of the Indians, and Government timber cruisers carefully select the trees to be cut.
Furthermore, vast stands of heavily timbered lands on Indian reservations are being held intact, thus safeguarding the future supply.
The Bureau of Reclamation was the only one of the 12 bureaus in the Department of the Interior which seemed hopeless two years ago.
An expenditure of approximately $200,000,000 for reclamation projects had been made by the Federal Government during the previous 20 years, requiring an additional $60,000,000 to complete them.
The reclamation fund, originally intended to revolve or be funded in 10 years, had not revolved in 20 years.
Although the fund was supplemented by a lump appropriation of $20,000,000 in 1908, repayment to the Government was only 9½/ per cent after 20 years.
Promises made 20 years previously had not been kept and we set about to discover the reasons for it.
Evolution of reclamation.
The first step toward reclaiming reclamation was a complete reappraisal.
A fact-finding· committee was appointed, and after six months'study reported that dams and canals had been constructed on some projects for.the irrigation of lands having inadequate water supply and were either not capable of development or had soil inherently too poor to support a family.
The committee estimated that on this account the Government confronted a definite loss of $18,561,146 and a probable additional loss of $8,830,000 of its capital investment.
This was followed hy a classification of lands under Federal irrigation to ascertain accurately the amount of unirrigable land, the amount of land with soil of poor quality but possible for irrigated agricultural development, and the amount of lands already under existing and proposed Federal canals capable of producing profitable crops.
Lands were divided into six classes in accordance with their varying degrees of fertility, and the total areas of each class on projects recorded.
A report will be made to Congress at the coming session with recommendations under the new reclamation law covering the proposed charging off and/or suspending of approximately $26,000,000, being losses levied against unproductive lands and not recoverable by the Government.
If this relief is approved by Congress it will relieve farmers from indebtedness they can not meet because of obstacles such as land of little or no value.
Whether the loss to the Government is $26,000,000 or double that, is not of material concern when balanced against the continuance of a mistaken policy.
The obligation of the Government in reclamation was further increased at the last session of Congress by initial appropriations for four new reclamation projects and extensions of three existing projects which will ultimately entail an expenditure of ap additional $60,000,000.
These further expenditures out of the reclamation fund have been safeguarded by Congress by requiring investigations of economic and agricultural feasibility, and in some cases requiring State cooperation.
This policy is sound and public sentiment will, I believe, support it.
Two years are not enough to correct the errors of inexperience, lack of vision, or a mistaken policy.
It has,' however, been long enough to dispel the secrecy which has so long veiled the operations of Federal reclamation.
We are now entering a new era in the history of reclamation.
Its present condition, its difficulties, necessities, and its promises have been opened up to Congress and to the public with all frankness.
Some of the problems are not new, but all of them are susceptible of solution.
It lies within the province of the Congress to determine an equitable and economically sound policy which will remedy existing evils and make impossible a recurrence of conditions which have demoralized the Federal Reclamation Service.
Accretions to the reclamation fund.
The annual income to the reclamation fund is decreasing because its sources are being exhausted.
To offset this loss and stimulate development of the West, smaller farm units, more farmers and more intensive cultivation of the projects already built is necessary to conserve reclaimed farm lands.
The following table shows the receipts of the reclamation fund from the sale of public lands, mineral leases on the public domain and other accretions, with the expenditures for Federal reclamation in States, as of June 30, 1925.
Collections.
Under their contracts with the Government, water users in 1924 were obligated to pay $3,869,000 on construction charges.
Of this $2,066,000 is uncollected.
It cost $2,107,000 to operate and maintain the irrigation works of which the sum of $959,744 remained unpaid on June 30, 1925.
This includes only delinquent charges for a single year.
The uncollected charges due for the five years ended June 30, 1925, amount to over $8,500,000.
Repayment is fundamental to good business morals.
It is the foundation of all trade relations at home and of comity between nations abroad.
This principle was lost sight of by the Bureau of Reclamation in the past and in the insistence of water users for moratoriums, affording temporary relief but multiplying the ultimate burdens.
It is necessary to fix this principle in the minds of all interested in irrigable lands before a policy of mutual obligations between the Government and those to whom it has advanced money for reclamation can be established.
For years the practice has been to grant relief when urgently insisted upon.
Entire divisions and districts were permitted to defer payments regardless of the number of prosperous farmers amply able to pay.
This year a new policy was adopted.
Attempts have been made to equalize the collection of payments between owners on the same projects—between the payer and the evader.
Blanket relief was denied and individual requests for postponement of payments were required, each applicant having to prove his inability to pay.
The collection of hundreds of thousands of dollars resulted from the enforcement of this policy.
Settlers' obli: gations that otherwise would have increased have been reduced.
Collecting money long past due is not a pleasant task.
It has been especially difficult in the Bureau of Reclamation during the past year because heretofore not pressed, and distressing, because there are many instances of undoubted financial straits.
During this time consideration has been given to thousands of applications for individual relief.
It was an exacting task.
It resulted in the deferment of payments of hundreds of thousands of dollars, but it also resulted in the discovery that influential landowners have not only paid nothing themselves but have urged their neighbors to oppose payments.
Some irrigation farmers have incurred debts and have not been able to improve and equip their farms for the best results.
But there has been an element among water users that believes the Government should build irrigation works as it improves rivers and harbors, without promise to repay.
But that is not the law.
This attitude has given rise to grave evils.
The bona fide farmer himself, and not the speculator, is the dependable reliance of reclamation and is entitled to first consideration.
Private debts and their high rates of interest contribute tremendously to the burdens of reclamation farmers and have caused many foreclosures.
Long time loans at low rates of interest, similar to those made by the Federal land banks, would relieve this situation.
Federal reclamation compelled Government operation from the beginning and the Government has been unable to relinquish this responsibility.
The result is that neither the State, the community, nor the water user himself has been greatly concerned with the prompt payment of obligations specifically imposed by Federal law.
No other creditor could have avoided foreclosure under these conditions.
Reclamation can not be maintained as a solvent or business enterprise if its financial management is subject to imagined political expediency.
The best politics is honest government and the right thing is always, eventually, expedient.
Any plan of continuing reclamation will prove a hopeless undertaking until the growing tendency to repudiate debts due the Government has been eliminated.
Ignoring delinquencies or weakly evading attempts to collect them has led to the financial demoralization of Federal reclamation.
Reclamation farmers as a class are not repudiators.
That is not the spirit of the West.
But their hopes have not been realized.
Those anxious to pay and acquire their homes in fee simple have been discouraged by the failure of reclamation officials to sense the kind of help needed for this comparatively new enterprise of Government, and by neighbors who were not paying, yet were being furnished water by the bureau with regularity equal to their own.
Heretofore all reclamation projects have been grouped, in the.
Water users also have been regarded as settlers struggling to pay for a farm.
Most of them are such, but there are also capitalists and speculators who have been attracted to these projects and are a very influential fraction of the landowners.
Projects should be differentiated between, as should settlers on a given project.
Seven projects have paid more than 85 per cent of all the Govern-.
Simple justice to the irrigator who, year after year has met his payments, to the Nation which has advanced -the money and to.
Yearly construction payments.
On existing projects the total acrcage charge and the annual payment required under the original reclamation law are equal and uniform in amount.
The settler located miles away from a railroad or on a farm having poor soil and low crop returns is required to pay the same construction charge as the settler whose farm is located close to the railroad or the farmer whose soil is fertile.
The same difference exists between the cost of water and its production value on different projects.
This results in economic inequality among projects when considered as a whole and among settlers on a single project.
It explains in part why some projects have met their obligations to the Government and others have failed, and why some settlers have paid their charges and others are in arrears.
Congress in 1924 enacted a law intended to correct this economic: injustice, but so far as its provision for 5 per cent annual installments.
It.
While the principle is sound, preparation for putting it into operation has shown that its administrative difficulties will be great.
The more prosperous projects prefer the original plan, unaffected by the 1924 act, rather than construction payments based on gross production.
There is a wide disagreement among water users as to what gross production means, and as to how the value of the crops is to be determined.
Congress based its action in fixing 5 per cent of gross production on reports of crop values in the past.
The claim is now made by settlers that past figures are too high.
If these figures are to be materially reduced in the future, then the percentage of payment must be increased beyond 5 per cent, as fixed in the 1924 act, or the payment period will be prolonged beyond any date heretofore considered by Congress.
These facts raise the question whether or not some simpler plan for adjusting construction payments to the production value of water for irrigation can not be devised by Congress.
Local control and responsibility necessary.
Forty years of observation and participation in reclaiming prairie and desert land by irrigation has demonstrated to me beyond argument that far-distant operation by Federal or State Government, proxies of absentee landowners, original companies, or their successors, or hired supervision from any outside source, can not make a financial or community success of reclamation by irrigation.
Divided responsibility in directing farm routine is impracticable.
Farming is a developing science, and successful operation of projects, as well as the conduct of the farm, requires that it be done by the.
His individual freedom of action is of first appeal to the farmer.
His set-apart location and reliance on home production of life's necessities compels individual initiative.
This idea has been carried into practical operation through State laws permitting the organization of water users' associations and the creation of irrigation districts to construct and operate irrigation works.
At its last session Congress authorized a change in the Government's policy, by providing the conditions under which water users on a project may assume complete control.
Under this plan, operation and maintenance costs are to be paid in advance annually, a requirement exacted by private irrigation companies and fundamental to an enduring policy in Federal reclamation.
Construction charges due from each project are to be collected by the association or district officers and paid every year to the Government, in a lump sum, instead of collections being attempted by the bureau from the individual farmers.
On many projects water users' associations and irrigation districts have been organized.
Some districts lack sufficient legal jurisdiction to assume the operation of irrigation districts and guarantee repayment of construction costs.
Delays in signing contracts with these organizations have resulted, until the necessary changes in their by-laws to comply with State laws are effected.
In other sections the formation of irrigation districts is being embarrassed by landholders who have refused to pay delinquencies, hoping to compel those who have paid to share them through the joint liability to be imposed upon districts as a whole.
A remedy in State law must be found that will avoid this injustice.
Problems of settlement and farm development.
The pressing anxiety to-day on irrigation projects, whether initiated by private companies, guaranteed by States, or fostered by the Federal Government, is how to attract experienced farmers to occupy and cultivate the land.
This department has 6,000 vacant farm units under Federal canals with water rights, to sell on long-deferred payments without interest, but there are no buyers.
On a number of existing projects where there is good soil, plenty of water, capable of growing high-priced crops, and where construction charges are much lower than on any new projects under consideration, there are still large areas of land which have never been irrigated.
On one project of this character, where water has been available for the last 16 years, only one-fourth of the area is being irrigated.
The remaining area is either dry farmed or not farmed at all.
Much of the land of this character is held by nonresident investors; it is held in tracts larger than is permitted by the reclamation act and should be subdivided and settled by farmers who understand the technique of irrigation.
A coordinated plan for the subdivision and settlement of these privately owned lands is one of the imperative needs of reclamation.
Only through an increase in the number of cultivators and improvement in the methods of cultivation can the solvency of a number of the old projects be assured.
This is a difficult task.
Its success will require the enactment by Congress or by the States of additional laws for the subdivision, colonization, and farm development of unimproved lands now in private ownership.
Unless this is done, a heavy loss to the Government on projects otherwise economically sound is inevitable.
Congress last winter determined that the Federal Government should not obligate itself to colonize reclamation projects.
It would be an advanced step toward perpetual Government ownership and should be avoided.
New land, which effort is being made to bring under cultivation, is nearly all privately owned.
Logically, then, interest in settlement is primarily local and it will be better maintained if responsibility for settlement is assumed by the State, which reaps the first benefits from population and taxes bring perpetual incomes to county and State treasuries.
The tax levy, for example, in Ada and Canyon counties, in the Boise Valley, Idaho, including.
There are approximately 335,000 acres of Government-aided project lands in these two counties.
But governors of States have refused their assent to aid in settlement.
As an alternative it has been suggested that permanent and properly financed organizations of business men within the State or community where irrigation projects exist, or are contemplated, could be formed to aid railroads and the bureau in promoting settlement.
Yet, there is the objection to this plan that the Government still would be the responsible directing agency.
If settlement and farm development are to be localized, it ought to be done under the direction of the State, and the State should be the one to make the contracts with local agencies for their aid and cooperation in development.
The contract of the United States should be with the State.
The planning and construction of works should be carried on by the General Government and centralized engineering and economic organization should be retained as at present.
Economy and efficiency would be promoted by this, and, furthermore, the most important projects of the future will be interstate in character.
There should be cooperation between the States and Federal Government in the preliminary investigations and in determining what works should be recommended to Congress for construction.
This was insistently urged when the original reclamation act was being framed.
After the works are built, they would be turned over to the State under the terms of a contract entered into before construction started, under which the State would become responsible for directing and financing the subdivision of the land, the settlement and development of farms, and the repayment to the Government of the construction costs.
Reluctance of the State to aid projects should be regarded as an evidence that these projects are not regarded as good security for Government loans.
The interest of Senators and Members of the House who secure these appropriations from Congress must be enlisted in promoting the best results from the expenditure, in the interest alike of their constituents and the Government.
Until measures have been put into effect to solve these problems of settlement and development and old projects have been made selfsustaining, the advisability of undertaking new projects would seem to be conjectural and the entire matter should receive the most serious attention and consideration by Congress, if a basically sound and unassailable permanent policy is ever to be evolved.
Opposition to extension of reclamation.
The primary object of the original reclamation law was the reclaiming of the arid and semiarid public lands of the West.
In only one instance does more than half the land belong to the United States under suggested new irrigation projects.
The record for all present projects shows that of the total area embraced within them 1,134,399 acres were originally public land and 1,837,719 acres were privately owned.
There is a widespread opposition to the opening up, by the Government, of additional acres of agricultural land at this time.
It is directed mainly against Government reclamation of privately owned land.
Charges are made that overproduction of agricultural products will be increased and present prices reduced.
This opposition is not confined to the middle States which fear competition from the virile West but is voiced also by farm organizations in irrigated districts, which protest against local competition from increased acreage.
Without question we will need, years hence, all of the water that can be stored and all of the irrigable productive land in the West to feed our people.
It is of first importance now that we eliminate the menaces to the success of Federal reclamation; evolve a constructive policy which will prepare in time for this inevitable demand yet to be made upon it.
It must be shown that new projects will not entail a loss to the reclamation fund, otherwise farmers outside of irrigation projects will have to compete with subsidized agriculture.
New reclamation projects.
Congress made appropriations last winter totaling $4,330,000 for four new reclamation projects and for extensions to new areas on three existing projects.
To complete these will entail an ultimate expenditure of $60,000,000.
This amount is one of the largest authorizations for new projects in the history of Federal irrigation.
It is almost half the construction cost of all the old projects built during the past 25 years.
A project once commenced must be completed.
The department has been cautious in expending initial appropriations for these seven projects.
It was not certain that money would be available to complete these projects promptly.
Besides, a large outlay on new projects may delay completing necessary works on old projects.
The annual accretions to the reclamation fund, instead of increasing, began to decline last year, owing chiefly to the falling off in revenues from oil leases.
The receipts from land, oil, and other mineral sources credited to the reclamation fund were $1,818,000 less than for the previous year.
The acre construction cost of these new projects will be more than double that of the older projects, especially those built 15 or 20 years ago.
Farm products have not doubled in price.
Reclamation projects located at high altitudes or far north, where growing seasons between frosts are short, are at a disadvantage in the markets in competition with projects having a longer growing season.
The sugar beet, the dairy cow, and the mutton sheep must take the place of wheat and hay in such locations.
Whether the lands will be sufficiently productive to attract qualified settlers, after the Government has completed the irrigation works, is the question to be answered before new projects are recommended.
The prospect for settlement is most uncertain at this time and without adequate settlement no project is feasible.
The cost of developing farms has increased in like ratio to project construction cost.
Past experience has shown that a settler on a reclamation project should have capital estimated at from $2,000 to $5,000 to construct a home, prepare lands, buy equipment and farm implements, and to cover other costs of this initial investment.
But the value of water in agricultural production has not increased in proportion to construction and farm development costs and there is need, therefore, of a careful appraisal and evaluation to determine whether it would be worth in irrigation what it costs to provide it.
The following facts as to new developments show the progress being made toward construction and the necessary steps to be taken before construction can or should begin.
Initial appropriation for the Kittitas division of the Yakima project in Washington amounted to $750,000.
The total cost of this division will be $11,000,000, of which $2,000,000 has already been spent, and $9,000,000 more must be provided.
The Bureau of Reclamation has finished the engineering plans for the irrigation works, but a soil classification, required by law, has not yet been completed.
Congress also stipulated that no expenditures should be made until the State of Washington had entered into a contract for development and settlement of the project.
The State has not yet complied with this provision.
On the Šun River project in Montana, $4,000,000 has already been spent.
To provide storage and build canals to reach a new area of 60,000 acres will require an additional expenditure of $5,000,000.
To begin this new construction $500,000 was included in the appropriation last year.
There is a restrictive provision in this appropriation act against building canals to irrigate this new land until the Governor of Montana has signed a contract with the Secretary of the Interior obligating the State to provide settlers and furnish financial aid in the development of farms.
The Governor of Montana has announced that he is not in a position even to recommend legislation needed to authorize him to sign this contract.
For the Vale project in Oregon, Congress appropriated $500,000 to commence construction, which will ultimately cost $3,600,000.
A proviso in the act stipulated that the State of Oregon should assume the settlement of the project.
The governor has advised us that he is without authority to enter into a contract of this character.
Other legal complications on water-right questions have arisen in the Vale project that may delay construction pending a final court decision.
The Spanish Springs division of the Newlands project in Nevada has an appropriation of $500,000, the final cost after completion being estimated at $6,000,000.
A soil survey and land classification must be made of the land under existing works and of new areas to be irrigated.
Prior power rights are in dispute.
One-third of the land is in an Indian reservation and legislation by Congress is necessary before this land may be included in the project.
Congress again provided for participation by State or local interests in settlement and development, but the Governor.of Nevada advises us that the State is financially unable to enter into such an agreement with the United States.
The Salt Lake Basin project in Utah has been delayed in construction because the farmers most concerned in its completion have not agreed upon a contract for repayment.
Initial appropriations of $1,275,000 were made by Congress at its last session, the estimated cost of the project being $13,000,000.
The Government has.had its plans and estimates for this work ready for months, but the local water users have not yet been able to organize and make the necessary financial arrangements to guarantee the repayment of its costs in accordance with the law.
Appropriations or reappropriations for the Baker project in Oregon were made for the years 1923, 1924, 1925, and 1926.
The appropriation for 1926 is $500,000, with an estimate of $3,600,000 to complete.
The project has been subject to many complete and incomplete investigations.
Divers and conflicting reports have been made as to its feasibility.
The fact that money has been available for four years without work being inaugurated, indicates grave misgivings as to the wisdom of its construction.
The Secretary of the Interior and the Commissioner of Reclamation visited the project last July.
It was then urged by local interests that construction should begin at once.
It was represented that reclamation officials had no option; that an appropriation was equivalent to a mandate to construct.
Having doubt as to the project's feasibility, the question of the Secretary's duty and authority was referred to the Attorney General for formal opinion, and that official held 'that the Secretary was not only not obligated to begin construction but should not dc so until Congress had an opportunity to review its former action.
This opportunity will be given.
For the Owyhee project in Oregon, Congress has appropriated $315,000.
Its final cost is estimated to be $18,000,000.
The greater part of the land is in private ownership and a considerable part held in large tracts.
Time is being consumed in making the necessary physical and economic investigations to comply with the law.
These have not been completed.
Columbia Basin.
The Columbia Basin project, contemplating an expenditure equal to, or greater, than that heretofore made by the Government for reclamation, is a natural asset of national appeal.
It is an inland empire of land, water, potential power, and sunshine in the Northwest, awaiting development.
With exceptional prescience its builders are defining a governing policy that should insure its permanency when built.
This is a necessary preliminary step which should reassure Congress that appropriations for beginning construction will be later supported by local sentiment, necessary to the success of any project.
But because of the many years that will be required to complete a project of such proportions a far-flung vision will be necessary to apppaise properly the possibilities and future necessities of the potential resources of the Columbia Basin.
A continuing problem.
The American Indians are ultimately to become members of the body politic of the States in which they reside.
Many thousands of them already released from Federal guardianship have become an integral part of the citizenship of various commonwealths, owning their own homes, paying taxes, and earning a livelihood for themzelves and their families.
The so-called Indian problem is no different from the White problem, except that it is less advanced and the Government assists in solving it.
The progrezs of the red man depənds upon many things.
It is retarded, rather than hastened, however, by treating it as an academic problem.
We can not legislate the Indian into the white man's wavs, nor train his footsteps by bureaucratic administration of his affairs, alone.
His future well-being lies in his adaptability to the civilized structure of society which the times has built up around him.
Opportunity for progress may be given to him by law, he may be taught the rudiments of education, but the trinity of his enlightenment must be completed through his native intelligence.
He must absorb our civilization in school and out of it; or he will continue old habits and tribal customs.
Aggression is the law of existence.
Retrogression is promoted by isolation, whereas contact with the whites encourages an amalgamation of the races and customs through competition.
State administration.
Two years ago attention was called to the fact that the solution of this problem was being left wholly to the Federal Government.
Because the Indians pay no State taxes and dwell on reservations with fixed boundaries located within States which have no direct jurisdiction, State governments take little interest in them.
Through the Bureau of Indian Affairs the Federal Goverr ment operates 217 schccls for the Indians, a medical service of 194 physicians and 132 nurses to conserve health, a field matron branch to protect their social well-being, also an organization to promote agriculture and assist them in farming and stockraising.
All these activities in the interest of the Indians are being conducted through long-distance administration from Washington.
Yet the State governments maintain similar agencies performing the same functions for their white populations, who are next-door neighbors of the Indians.
State boards of health, departments of education and agriculture, boards of charity and welfare are in a position to assume these responsibilities for the Indians and perform them more promptly and sympathetically than the Federal Government.
Public interest in this situation has been elicited during the past year in the States.
Health officials in eight of them —Arizona, California, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Wisconsin—have actively cooperated with the department in a campaign to stamp out trachoma and other infectious diseases among the Indians.
The results attained from methods adopted during the past year in combating trachoma on the Indian reservations are encouraging.
Small traveling medical units consisting of physicians, nurses, and attendants were organized.
They went from one Indian village to another, holding clinics and establishing temporary hospitals.
In the Southwest more than 38,111 Indians have been examined.
Out of this number 7,236 were found suffering with trachoma.
Operations were performed on 4,285 Indians and 2,863 others were treated without operation.
In other sections of the country cooperation by the State boards of Health with the Indian medical service in the eradication of this infectious eye disease resulted in 13,858 examinations discovering 1,953 cases of trachoma.
Operations numbered 718 and 1,217 cases were otherwise treated.
State health boards have also participated in surveys initiated by the Government of public health conditions among Indian populations.
Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Nebraska, have gone even further and are maintaining visiting and traveling nurses on Indian reservations, administering to sick Indians in their homes.
These steps presage the ultimate assumption by States of the administration of the public health work among the Indians within their borders.
Complete transfer of Indian education from the Federal Government to State jurisdiction must be accomplished before satisfactory results may be expected in this field.
There should be a public school on every Indian reservation.
The number of Indians enrolled in public schools now total 34,452, their tuition being paid by the Indian Service.
Sixty-seven thousand of our 80,000 Indian children are now in Government, public, or sectarian schools.
Many Government schools have been discontinued altogether, the pupils being transferred to the public schools conducted by States.
Daily contact with white children has facilitated their civilization and through them, contributed to the enlightenment of adult Indian parents.
Construction of additional Government schools is now being delayed by the department, pending action by States in extending their educational systems to include the Indians.
Proposals that State boards of education take over the schools now operated by the bureau may well receive the sympathetic attention of Congress.
The execution of any plan of this character would require financial assistance and school districts should be reimbursed, preferably from Indian funds by the Federal Government.
Centralized authority with decentralized responsibility, the fundamental of all effective administration, is peculiarly urgent in the Indian Service, partly because of the great distances between the bureau in Washington and its wards, but chiefly because States must come to realize that the Indian problem will be theirs to assume eventually, and the National Government's participation will become cooperative, rather than initiative, in character because of the widespread responsibilities.
Indian superintendents.
The pivotal factors of the Indian Service are the superintendents of agencies.
Theirs are the key positions in administering it.
They are the commissioner's eyes, ears, and hands in the field.
Every activity on a reservation must look to its superintendent, or through him, to the department.
The commissioner must apply his ideas of service through him.
Every contact he makes takes on the superintendent's influence to some degree.
The superintendent colors every service going to the employees under him and their charges, and in the other direction, to the Indian Bureau.
A superintendent of good character and resourcefulness requires little direction.
One without these faculties can not be improved by advice, inspiration or regulations.
Fortunately, the old type of Indian agent has largely given way to the present-day conception of the agency superintendent.
The ideal set for these essential officers in the supervision of the Indian is high.
Friends of the Indians are solicitous about this spirit of service.
Errors of judgment can always be reviewed with leniency, but subterfuges, neglect, or incompetency can not be condoned where human well-being is involved.
To permit one responsible for authority in office to deceive himself is as harmful in its results as if brought about through intent.
Frankness between the Indian superintendents and the commissioner is vital to good administration.
The National Park Service supervises 19 parks and 32 monuments.
The former embrace 11,272 square miles, while the monuments are confined to smaller tracts consisting in some instances of only a few acres.
Over 2,000,000 people visited, them last season and iņdications point to a rapid increase in the number availing themselves of these attractions in the future.
To care for this influx of visitors has taxed the ingenuity of the National Park Service.
With one exception all of the national parks and monuments are west of the Mississippi River and their great distance from the centers of population suggested the need for establishing other appropriate park areas in the East to provide for the growth of the out-of-doors movement.
Two sites of national park proportions have been selected, one in Virginia and the other in North Carolina-Tennessee.
Congress, as well as the people throughout the East and the State authorities concerned, have given their support to the movement.
Progress has been made toward acquiring land for the purpose, for donation to the Government.
Motor travel into the parks far surpasses transportation by rail, embarrassing road construction and repair.
With the advent of the automobile the national forests, States, and municipalities have entered this attractive recreational field with enthusiasm.
The national parks are national museums of our American wilderness and should be commercialized only incidentally.
Congress's attention is invited to a policy intended to stress the educational value of these primeval galleries of American scenery.
A foundation for an educational system was laid in the naturestudy class organized in Yosemite and several other national parks.
During the past year educational work has been applied to all the major parks.
With the cooperation of the American Association of Museums, a definite beginning has been made in the construction of permanent buildings for museum use.
In the new Yosemite village, in Yosemite National Park, an appropriate and artistic structure has been built, the gift of the Laura Spillman Rockefeller Memorial, to house an interesting collection telling the history and geological story of the park.
It will also serve as headquarters for the nature-guide activities.
In the Mesa Verde National Park, through private donations, the superintendent was able to design and construct a building of pueblo type in which will be exhibited the culture of the cliff dwellers.
It is hoped that these two museums are only the forerunners of others to be established for the benefit and enjoyment of the people, each to be adapted to the peculiar requirements of the park in which it is located.
The cost of constructing these important buildings will not come from the National Treasury, but will be taken care of through volunteer gifts from private sources.
The donors are to be congratulated upon advancing so materially the particular educational program which is now an outstanding feature of park development.
The Federal Government should be relieved of the supervision of smaller parks and many national monuments and be permitted to confine its administration exclusively to parks of national proportions of interest to people from every State.
It should not compete in small recreational areas with States and municipalities, but concentrate on those of national scope in which recreation should be secondary to the preservation of what nature made, to be left as found.
The smaller areas should be administered by the States in which they are located, many of which already maintain State parks.
These could be linked into a chain along tourist highways.
The huge sums of money derived from tourist travel is of increasing local importance.
It has been estimated that tourists expend somcthing like $50,000,000 in Colorado alone during the vacation period, while this sum is said even to be exceeded in other States.
California is reputed to receive $500,000,000 a year from this same tourist source; while in Minnesota the estimates are placed at $150,000,000.
But to commercialize the national parks would be to destroy an irreplaceable heritage.
Health and education of natives.
Alaska's divided administration among nine Federal departments and that of the Territory is of the greatest menace to its development.
Responsibility for the intimate obligations of her people to their Territory has been neglected by them and interfered with by the Federal Government.
Our guardianship of the Alaskan natives'interests has been lax and inadequate.
The amount annually expended by this department through the Bureau of Education for its 85 schools is $401,972.43, and $124,382.20 for medical relief.
The distances between settlements to be traveled over trails, impassable in winter and tedious in any season, renders intimate supervision most difficult.
Epidemics of sickness break out.
Preventable deaths occur.
Teeth are lost from neglect and disease invited for want of available advice and assistance.
The Government maintains five hospitals in Alaska.
One is at Juneau, the capital, while the others, with one exception, are located at convenient points along the coast districts or the rivers of the Territory, accessible to water transportation.
At the present time they are not welcome in hospitals or schools for the whites.
Not a single dentist is in the regular Government employ in Alaska.
Only in recent years has an effort been made to render dental aid to these natives by sending a traveling dentist to native villages for brief periods.
The health conditions of the natives are a constant menace to the health of the white inhabitants of the Territory.
The Bureau of Education's representatives report that in almost every native village, the helplessness of their situation is evident.
Funds for additional physicians and nurses as well as dentists are needed.
A new hospital to give medical aid and treatment to the natives living in the vast central region of the Territory is of paramount necessity.
A plan has been suggested by the Governor of Alaska to afford medical facilities by equipping a shallow-draft motor boat as a small hospital and clinic to ply the inland waters included in the Yukon drainage basin with its 4,000 miles of navigable streams.
Congress may well consider this suggestion as an appeal to human sympathy.
Maintenance of public health by modern methods which civilization has made imperative in the Territory of Alaska, is an impossible task for the Alaskans.
A most destructive disease to the natives was communicated to them by whites, imposing a national obligation which our Government can not justly ignore.
Its obligations to the native people of this far-northern possession are the same as to the Indians of continental United States.
Their environment, economically and socially, is less fortunate.
Both are wards of the government and entitled to protection and encouragement.
The scheme of industrial courses provided by the Bureau of Education in Alaska is to prepare native boys and girls to make the best living possible in an Alaskan way in Alaska.
The whole system of instruction is now designed to accomplish this purpose and is constituted by teaching sanitation, health, thrift (discrimination in values), civics (obedience to constituted authority), and occupational activities (emphasizing dignity, necessity, and joy of work).
There is no royal road to learning in any place.
There is just one road which all the world must pursue.
In Alaska with a primitive people, it is a tough, rough road, over hills and mountains through valleys and tundras, along coasts and rivers with many detours and many obstacles which at first seem almost insurmountable.
The natives of Alaska have never been pauperized by subsidies and they are self-reliant enough to follow the road if the direction is clearly indicated.
The Alaska Railroad.
Talk of scrapping the Alaska Railroad has been revived.
Whether the railroad should ever have been built is now beside the question.
We have it, and to abandon it despite the loss in its maintenance would amount to a reversion of the American policy of progress.
Its construction was hurried and some of its structures are fimsy and temporary in character, menaced by glacial rivers, and its tracks are underlaid by ice at some depth the year round.
All of which makes its upkeep expensive and out of proportion to earnings.
When the construction of the Alaska Railroad was originally proposed the claim was made that with adequate transportation facilities mines in the interior of Alaska would be opened and flourish.
In 1915 these minerals were valued at $32,790,000.
By 1924 they had decreased to $17,457,000.
Production of coal in Alaska in competition with the States has not been feasible.
Neither has the cost of producing other minerals been sufficiently profitable to attract capital, although the Government has provided the means of shipping them out.
Conversion of the right of way of this railroad to a truck highway, construction of a bhnch railroad from Portage Creek to Portage Bay, abandonment of the line from Anchorage to Seward entirely, or the use of that division only in summer, largely for tourists, have all been suggested.
There is little local commercial use for a railroad between Anchorage and Seward, as both are seaports.
It might be maintained in summer, it is suggested, as a pleasure road and the freight carried to Anchorage by water.
Automobiles require hard-surfaced roads.
These could hardly be built in Alaska for less than $50,000 a mile for surfacing and widening of the railway right of way.
There are no such roads at present constructed in Alaska and the effects of extremely cold weather on them is unknown.
The alternate freezing and thawing of the surface in Alaska would be disastrous to truck roads, whether hard-surfaced or not.
Gravel-surfaced roads are now impracticable in Alaska for heavy trucks except in periods when the roads are frozen.
Automobile traffic would encounter similar obstructions from slides in winter, as do the railroads; their removal would be more expensive than similar clearing from a railroad right of way.
Looking forward.
Alaska is rapidly becoming a "lost province."
Without the inspiration of self-government or freedom of local initiative, opportunity for expansion has been curtailed by bureau oficials made hesitant by limited authority.
Alaskans have not been encouraged to develop pride of territorial growth or independence of administration.
The maximum population of 75,000 whites has shrunken to 20,000 (estimated), and production from its natural resources wavers and recedes.
Inevitably, Alaska must compete in the markets with its products.
Climate and soil and transportation are determining factors in agricultural competition and are necessarily weighed when developmental work of any sort is contemplated.
Climate and soil conditions are tixed by nature.
Transportation costs·can only be eliminated by lome production and consumption.
The situation of Alaska calls for a prompt sympathetic study by Congress.
Its natural resources and their possibilities; its methods of government and their effect; the attitude which we should assume toward it, whether governmental control should be constructive in type, or continue to cultivate dependency, or be removed entirely, should be weighed by the legislative branch of Government.
The suggestion that all of the Government's activities in Alaska be merged into one department should have the immediate consideration of Congress.
The Pension Bureau handles about 120,000 applications for pensions during the course of a year and distributes approximately $18,000,000 monthly to pensioners.
These payments are made in the form of checks which are delivered simultaneously, through cooperation with the Post Office Department, to pensioners in every section of the country.
Identification has been simplified and hundreds of thousands of dollars have been saved annually to pensioners by substituting these direct payments for the old voucher system.
In adjusting claims of Civil War veterans entitled to the $72 monthly pension the law is being sympathetically interpreted by the Pension Bureau.
More consideration is being given to examining boards'statements and to the sworn statements of these old soldiers, whose condition of helplessness is increasing with the passing of time.
For the first time in years the work of the bureau is practically current in all lines of activity.
Examination of claims has been expedited.
These results are due in a large measure to closer supervision, better cooperation and redistribution of work throughout the entire bureau.
When reclassification went into effect at the beginning of the fiscal year 1925 the Pension Bureau faced a deficit of over $21,000 for salaries of the 829 employees.
By allowing vacancies to lapse and rearranging the office procedure accordingly, the work of the bureau for the year was completed without requiring additional funds for salaries, and an unexpended balance of $28,573 was turned back to the Treasury.
A similar situation faced the bureau at the beginning of the fiscal year 1926, the salary appropriation being $28,300 less at the beginning of the year than the pay-roll requirements for the 789 employees.
However, in the four months that have elapsed, progress has been made toward reducing this threatened deficit and it is expected that the deficiency will be absorbed during the course of the year without detriment to the work of the bureau.
The building situation at St. Elizabeths Hospital is acute.
In the years since the war, the population from which the hospital draws its patients has been increased at a conservative estimate by five millions.
As a result the hospital is overcrowded to such an extent that its capacity to function at the highest efficiency is impaired.
The overcrowding amounts to 500 patients, without allowing for that percentage of vacant beds which good practice considers desirable.
The resident population is increasing by approximately 100 patients a year, temporary buildings, origin ally makeshifts, erected during the war, are now being maintained on the basis of a 10 per cent repair cost.
If the hospital is to maintain its high standard of efficiency under its present policy a building program should be developed to provide for 1,500 beds—500 for the overcrowded condition, 500 to replace those in temporary structures, and 500 for expansion.
Its management during the past fiscal year, under most trying overcrowded conditions, has been commendable.
Progress is being made in securing pledges for the $130,000 required for equipping the new medical school building for which Congress appropriated $370,000 contingent upon the raising of funds for equipment.
As mentioned in my previous report, there is urgent need for extension of facilities for medical education among the colored race.
The 1,700 matriculates of this university come from almost every State and 13 foreign countries.
The need for additional building facilities continues.
The university has but one major dormitory for young women and but one for young men.
There should be a building sufficiently large at least to house the young women who come from out of the city to the university.
At present only 140 young women of the total number of 510 enrolled last year could be accommodated in the dormitory for young women.
An office building to house the administrative departments of the university should be provided.
The administrative offices of the univérsity now take up room in the library building and in the main recitation building, which space is demanded for instruction and recitation purposes.
Freedmen's Hospital is one of the few institutions in the United States staffed by negroes and operated primarily for the medical and surgical treatment of the colored 'race.
At no time during its history has it been fully manned.
In 1908 new hospital buildings were completed and occupied, but no provision was made for increasing the personnel.
The need for a larger force has become more acute each year with the continual increase in patients and demands of the public.
One third of the population of Washington is colored.
The facilities for educating colored physicians, nurses, and dentists by the hospital in conjunction with Howard University Medical School are negligible, viewed in relation to the necessities of 125,000 of their race in this District, and 11,000,000 in the United States.
The shortage of nurses is serious.
Because of long hours and overwork in caring for patients, their health is being menaced and the standard of the nurses' training school is deteriorating.
The efficiency of the nurses is also being gradually undermined because of the insufficient time for rest, recreation, and study accorded them.
Unless these conditions are corrected, the grading of the medical school of Howard University will be lowered from its present grade A by the National Hospital Standardization Board, and the registration of the Freedmen's Hospital for nurses will be canceled in the near future, as the requirements of the National Association of Nurses, the New York State Board of Regents, and many other State boards are not being properly observed.
It is urgently recommended that Congress examine into the situation with regard to the prevailing shortage of personnel and advise itself of any necessary action to rectify it.
Conservation concerns the perpetuation of the human family by making intelligent use of what nature provides.
Conservation of the soil's fertility is vital to the life and the ultimate mental integrity of a people.
It produces human food and its conservation is fundamental.
Other natural resources should be conserved in accordance with their association in the scheme of living.
This is particularly true of our raw mineral materials.
These offer a special problem in conservation, in that once exhausted they are irreplaceable.
Mounting consumption and decreasing reserves, must through pressure of economic necessity force greater and greater attention to conservation of these products.
The benefits of practical conservation, the result of applying thrift and efficiency to the task of making farming profitable, should be studied.
In recent years public-land legislation has sought to promote the best utilization of the water power, the conservation of flood water, reserving of coal land from agricultural entry, and the protection of the oil industry from itself, by discouraging production in advance of possible needs.
All these efforts toward wiser use of the great natural resources of the West were made by the Federal Government in its capacity as the largest landowner.
The protection of the public estate, the guidance of the development of its resources, the promotion of the best use of the products of the national domain are practical objects, all summed up in the one word, conservation.
Best use"should be its keynote.
Conservation of our natural resources, meaning their economic use without waste, and an intelligent distribution, as to time, is being applied in administering this department.
Adopting this principle to the administration of mineral leasing on the public domain and Indian lands, including their agricultural sections, is one of its paramount problems.
The United States owns approximately30,000,000 acres of coal lands with valuable coal deposits of more than 200,000,000,000 tons.
It has 500,000 acres of phosphate lands, which can supply 8,000,000,000 tons of this essential fertilizer when it is demanded for American farms.
There are 4,000,000 acres of oil shale in the public domain from which possibly 60,000,000,000 barrels of oil can be extracted when prices warrant the higher cost of its development.
Before that time, however, there are millions of barrels' of oil yet to come, from wells on Government land, the amount now being taken from public and Indian lands representing one-tenth of the Nation's annual petroleum production.
Already one-twentieth of the coal mined in the public-land States comes from mines operated under Government lease, and 20 per cent of the zinc and 8 per cent of the lead mined in the United States comes from mines on Indian lands under supervision of this department.
The public domain also contains hundreds of water-power sites with potential power aggregating 25,000,000 horsepower.
There are a dozen or more water-power plants operating now in the United States of greater capacity for developing primary power than the site at Muscle Shoals and an equal number of unused sites of as great possibilities of development.
To safeguard this vast estate for future generations of America and permit its economic development to supply present needs require forestght and administrative skill.
Five years ago Congress enacted the general leasing law, which established the system of leasing mineral deposits on public lands to private operators, the Government receiving bonuses and rentals as well as royalties on the minerals produced.
At the present time there are outstanding 211 leases on Government coal lands and 422 on oil and gas lands.
To apply this conservation policy, a new line-up of mineral leasing activities was effected in the department during the past year through the organization of a conservation branch in the Geological Survey.
In this enlarged unit were placed a group of geologists and engineers designated to act as technical advisers and administrators in the classification of the public lands and in the determination of their character.
In addition, their duties consist of inspecting the mining operations and cooperating with the private operators in avoiding waste in the production of minerals on the public domain.
Oil and gas leasing work was also reorganized in the conservation branch.
Three field divisions were established under the jurisdiction of district supervisors or engineers in charge.
They were given full authority and responsibility to conduct operations and represent the Government in problems necessitating immediate decision not involving departmental policy, in place of the old practice of referring all questions of administration to the Washington headquarters.
This is but another application of our administrative practice to centralize authority but decentralize responsibility.
With the creation of this new unit it is believed that the custodial care of our natural wealth of oil and gas, coal and other minerals has been placed on a practical administrative basis.
Engineering efficiency, avoidance of waste, and the wise use of these resources are now being practiced and future public interests are being protected.
The Interior Department employs 225 physicians regularly and 4,728 intermittently or under contract, for special services.
The department maintains 90 hospitals and employs 322 nurses.
The work of these professional employees affects the well-being of 500,000 potential patients and actual beneficiaries under the laws of the United States.
The importance of physicians to the administration and functioning of the department can not be overrated.
Their preparation, qualifications, and the standards set up for them are of vital importance.
The requirements of Interior Department physicians cover the whole range of medicine as practiced to-day: Physical examinations, diagnosis and the treatment of disease, sanitation, preventive medicine, operative surgery, the specialties, and medico-legal work involved in applying pension laws to applicants who have been examined by special boards or physicians in all parts of the United States and foreign countries.
Medicine has come to mean disease prevention.
Indirectly by sanitation, vaccination against typhoid, smallpox, diphtheria, hydrophobia, tetanus, etc., and more directly by removing diseased conditions which progressively tend to death.
What was done empirically 25 years ago is to-day studied scientifically, and often proven, in the laboratory.
Well-equipped physicians maintain laboratories and staffs of assistants in their own offices which, in effect, are diagnostic clinics.
Similar equipment has been provided on some of the larger Indian reservations but it is impossible to supply it for the smaller agencies and other outlying medical units of the department.
The history of medical practice may be traced in the changed standards for physicians in the Indian Service.
It illustrates the graduation from ignorance and superstitions in the treatment of disease by "medicine men,"to the accomplishments of those skilled in the art and science of medicine.
The aboriginal "medicine man" was a composite of priest, soothsayer, doctor, and judge.
He held undisputed sway over the red man' from prehistoric times until about 50 years ago, when he was replaced by the old-time Indian doctor, incompetent, yet a step forward in advancing medicine.
He, in turn, has given way to the modern physician.
The metamorphosis of the Indian medical service has been a gradual process, extending over a long period of years, although yet far from satisfactory.
Not until 1873 were efforts made toward furnishing organized medical facilities for the Inidians, and already in 1878 the then Commissioner of Indian Affairs, in an effort to improve the standard of the medical service, demanded that thereafter persons employed as physicians on Indian reservations should be graduates of some medical college.
In 1890 Indian Service physicians were placed under civil-service and graduation from a "reputable medical college"was required, as well as a civil-service examination.
In 1925, the present Secretary of the Interior discontinued the practice of appointing graduates of class C medical colleges.
Appropriations for the medical relief of the Indians has been doubled within the last four years, $700,000 being available for the fiscal year 1926—an encouragement to earnest physicians engaged in the Indian Service who are far removed from the inspiration of contacts with medical men, and deprived of laboratories and libraries.
The physicians employed by the Pension Office have a dual responsibility: One to the Government in safeguarding the public treasury by preventing fraud or error in the issuance of pension certificates, and the other in their responsibility to their fellow man for a correct diagnosis and just appraisal of his disabilities.
Four thousand six hundred and thirty-one members of the profession serve on pension examining boards in the field.
They examined 74,985 claimants last year at a cost of $570,000.
Their work is reviewed by a corps of medical examiners in the bureau, whose duty it is to finally determine the pensionable status of the applicant, from the blank form filled out by the field medical officer, but without opportunity to examine the applicant.
The salary of medical examiners in the Bureau of Pensions in Washington is $2,400 per annum.
Briefly, their work is: (1) To prepare specific instructions to examining surgeons; (2) to pass upon the sufficiency of returned certificates of medical examinations; (3) to consider allegations of claimant, his military or naval record, and other written evidence bearing on the nature and degree of his disabilities; (4) to determine proper rates over successive periods from the date the pension begins; (5) to determine whether disabilities under certain laws are due to vicious habits; (6) in claims of widows and minor children to determine whether the soldiers' death was due to cause legally accepted as of service origin in line of duty; (7) in claims of helpless minors to determine whether the child, at the age of 16 years, was insane, idiotic, or otherwise physically or mentally helpless; and (8) to render opinions on questions of pathology.
Medical reviewers, whose salary is $3,000 per annum, are selected from the medical examiner force, because of professional qualifications, efficiency and experience with cases arising under the various pension laws.
They either approve or disapprove the action of the medical examiner if doubt is raised and take final action in a very large percentage of claims.
The work of these medical examiners and reviewers in Washington is judicial.
Action is taken on reports submitted by other physicians in the field.
Their duties emphasize the importance of securing physicians who have had wide experience in the general practice of medicine.
But it is difficult for the Civil Service Commission to interest qualified doctors in the examinations announced from time to time, because of the meager salaries paid.
These men, in a sense, censor the work of almost 5,000 well-qualified physicians in active practice in the field.
They handled more than 190,000 claims last year, of which approximately 105,000 were finally disposed of, involving millions of dollars in Government funds.
This tremendous financial disbursement demands the services of men of high professional qualifications who assume a moral obligation to veterans for skilled review of their disabilities.
We have difficulty also in securing competent physicians in Alaska.
The health conditions among the 27,000 natives in the Territory are not good.
Many native villages are insanitary and the ordinary rules of hygiene are unknown.
Eskimos and Indians are suffering from tuberculosis, syphilis, and other preventable diseases, without medical relief from the Government or other sources.
Only 8 physicians and 21 nurses are available to combat this condition, which indicates neglect of the welfare of these people.
The department is asking for an additional appropriation for the Alaska medical service, which will be expended partly in employing more physicians.
Here, again, inadequate salaries do not appeal to qualified physicians, unless they happen to be actuated by the missionary spirit.
Similar difficulty is experienced in St. Elizabeths Hospital in the District of Columbia.
It required two years'search in order to secure a specialist in one branch of the medical profession, and some vacancies have been allowed to remain open for two or three years because the hospital could not adjust the salary it could pay to the right man for the place.
The administration of the retirement fund and the payment of annuities to retired Federal employees is a function of the Interior Department.
It is expected that requests for increased annuities for Federal employees will be again presented to Congress.
The balance in the retirement fund at the close of the fiscal year 1925 was $44,665,- 778.50.
The department through its board of actuaries has been unable to furnish complete data with reference to the future depletion of this fund by reason of the absence of actuarial statistics for those coming within the provisions of the retirement law.
The Civil Service ·Commission has started a compilation of the personal history and service records of all Government employees, as authorized by the retirement act, which it is expected will enable the preparation of a reliable actuarial report for the consideration of the Congress.
The tendency to retain, in some instances, employees in the service after they have reached the retirement age, due to the low annuity, is discouraging to the younger personnel and works injustice to many of those of retirement age because of discrimination in the operation of the discretionary provision of the law, which permits the retention of employees of retirement age under certain conditions.
The need for an increase in the amount of the annuity is evident to all those who have had contact with the employees affected.
Many of them are still carrying responsibilities in the way of dependents and otherwise, the same as younger employees, and the annuity they receive is insufficient to meet the necessities of existence.
Secretary.
1. Entered and allowed during the fiscal year, public and Indian lands, 3,641,092 acres, a decrease of 923,320 acres as compared with the year previous.
2. Patented during the year 5,272,925 acres, a decrease of 3,553,- 114 acres as against the year previous.
3. Collected from all sources during the year an aggregate of $10,766,194.59, of which sum, after the deposit in the Treasury of the United States of the receipts for the benefit of special funds, there was turned over to the Treasury for the credit of its general fund the sum of $2,266,018.24.
4. Collected and deposited in the Treasury of the United States as the result of the work of the inspection service (formerly Field Service), $37,035.48.
5. Restored to the public domain as the result of investigations in the field 175,680 acres.
6. Investigated in the field and reported upon 15,495 cases.
7. Conducted 392 hearings in Government contests.
8. Obtained 49 convictions in criminal cases prosecuted during the year.
9. Approved and accepted surveys .
10. Entered of record 219,192 tract book notations.
11. Patented under the homestead law 4,233,942, acres, a decrease of 1,296,839 acres as compared with 1924.
12. Entered and allowed during the year 2,298,039 acres under the stock-raising homestead law.
13. Secured the withdrawal for stock-driveway purposes of 46,694 acres, and released from such withdrawal 29,550 acres.
14. Approved for patent 1, 079 certificates of town lot sales.
15. Patented 25 cash entries and 13 final and commuted homesteads under the Minnesota drainage act.
16. Canceled upon relinquishment, or judicial forfeiture, 524 grants of right of way.
17. Disposed of 183 applications for stock watering reservoirs.
18. Received for action one application for recognition as a State irrigation district involving 13,900 acres; since the date of the act 15 districts have been recognized involving an area of 1,237,002.23 acres.
19. Considered favorably 14 reports on private irrigation projects affecting 260 desert land entries.
20. Collected for the use of public lands in connection with hydroelectric power development $9,581.65.
21. Reccived for action 1,350 elections under section 24 of the Federal w ater power act, all but 45 of which, together with those pending at the beginning of the year, were disposed of.
22. Patented under the Carey Act, 15,196 acres.
23. Issued 151 permits for the development of underground water in Nevada.
24. Approved for patent 669 final desert land ertries.
25. Approved for patent 182 reclamation homestead ertries.
26. Secured the withdrawal for reclamation purposes of 291,080 acres, and restored 430,150 acres theretofore withdrawn for such purpose.
27. Opened to entry under the reclamation act 11 farm units embracing approximately 1,000 acres.
28. Secured the withdrawal and reservation for various public purposes of 3,648,407 acres of public land, and restored to entry 3,479,434 acres theretofore withdrawn.
29. Restored 13 "shore spaces," abutting upon navigable waters in Alaska.
30. Restored and opened to entry 6,869,078 acres subject to the preference right of entry by ex-service men.
31. Patented under the swamp land grant 4,266.94 acres.
32. Received by Executive order authority for the disposition of 12 abandoned military reservations and 23 Signal Corps stations in Alaska.
33. Collected on account of Chippewa logging under the act of June 27, 1902, $19,816.88.
Total amount received to date $9,616,- 796.27.
34. Conveyed to the States entitled thereto 328,925.23 acres of indemnity school lands, and 46,586.58 acres of quantity grant lands.
35. Conveyed to the States 42,294.06 acres, with a reservation of the minerals therein to the United States.
36. Conveyed to the States under cooperative agreements 168,- 623.65 acres.
Total amount conveyed under these agreements 588,569.44 acres.
37. Patented 455,675.04 acres under railroad grants.
38. Made 19 sales of timber on former Coos Bay wagon road lands, for which the sum of $202,540.25 was reeeived.
Total sales to date $728,602.29.
39. Made 67 sales of timber on lands formerly within the Oregon and California railroad grant, for which the sum of $583,573.45 was received.
Total sales to date $2,991,415.82.
40. Issued 2,138 Indian trust patents for an area of 610,195.21 acres, and 1,423 fee patents to Indians or purchasers for an area of 161,117.19 acres.
41. Patented two selections of land in lieu of lands within Indian reservations embracing 480 acres, receiving therefor a like area.
42. Approved for patenting 38 entries effecting transfers under the act of January 27, 1922 (42 Stat. 359); approved for patenting 69 forest lieu selections; approved 20 exchanges of land within national forest boundaries under the act of March 20, 1922 (42 Stat. 465); and approved 2 selections under the act of September 22, 1922 (42 Stat. 1017).
43. Added to the area of lands within the national forests 1,308,753 acres.
44. Approved for patent 21 private land claims.
45. Approved for patent 448 mineral entries and 7 coal entries.
46. Issued 17 potash permits and 2 leases, and 11 sodium permits and 1 lease.
47. Issued 76 coal prospecting permits for an area of 75,224.12 acres.
48. Awarded 54 coal leases for an area of 9,256.61 acres, and 2 licenses covering 80 acres.
49. Awarded 30 leases for an area of 11,229.30 acres, on a showing of discovery under the mineral leasing act.
50. Sold 3 leases, involving 535.98 acres, for which the Government received $1,371.92.
51. Granted 3,599 oil and gas prospecting permits under sections 13 and 20 of the mineral leasing act.
52. Received from bonuses, royalties, and rentals under the mineral leasing act $8,278,708.62.
53. Disposed of 1,530 contest cases.
54. Allowed 1,168 claims for repayment under statutory authority aggregating $110,915.41.
55. Prepared 99,555 pages of certified copies, partly for official use, for which the Government received approximately $17,000.
56. Submitted report showing adjustment status of Northern Pacific land grants.
57. Took action on approximately 2,000 homesteads for Fort Peck Indian lands involving default in payments.
5S.
Sold i2,379 photolithographic copies of township plats for $6,585, mounted 2,866 maps, made 11,792 blue-print copies, and distributed 2,549 State maps.
59. Important changes in the entire working organization of the General Land Office, including the cadastral engineering service, field investigating agents, and district land offices were effected during the year and are detailed in the commissioner's report.
Notable among these was the abolishment of approximately 50 per cent of the district land offices, with a resultant reduction of clerical force and a rearrangement of the divisions of the General Land Office, resulting in a net reduction of three divisions and 50 clerks, the latter figure not including 30 unfilled vacançies created by death, resignation, retirement, or transfer.
1. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1925, a net reduction of 344 positions was made in the Indian field service, with a resultant saving of $284,651 in salary expense.
2. Consolidation of two agencies under one administrative superintendent has been effected in five instances.
3. The new Shawnee sanatorium at Shawnee, Okla., with a capacity of 70 beds was completed; also a sanatorium for Chippewa Indians at Onigum, Minn., and a new 60-bed hospital for the Chilocco Indian School, Oklahoma.
Construction of a new dormitory at the Fort Lapwai Sanatorium, Idaho, was begun, though not quite completed prior to July 1.
A temporary trachoma hospital of 30 beds was established at Albuquerque, N. Mex., under the Southern Pueblo Agency.
4. Trachoma work among the Indians has been carried on actively, rot only in the territory of the southwestern trachoma campaign, which embraces Arizona, New Mexico, California south of Porterville, and that part of Utah lying within the boundaries of the San Juan Reservation, but also within the various districts of the special physicians at large.
Exclusive of work accomplished by the stationed school and agency physicians, 38,111 cases were examined, 7,236 cases of trachoma were found, and these all received operative or other appropriate treatment.
5. Surveys made by the supervisor of field nurses and field matrons led to the establishment of eight additional positions of field nurses.
6. A small increase in enrollment and attendance of Indian children in Government, mission, and public schools over the numbers for the preceding year was secured through effort of the field employees in charge of the school work.
Enrollment in the State public schools is now in excess of 34,000 Indian pupils.
7. A definite policy has been adopted as to the grading of the Government Indian schools which will tend to uniformity between schools of the same class.
This program has been already instituted in most of the schools and will be put into effect in the remainder as fast as teachers and facilities permit.
8. With assistance and cooperation of the American Child Health Association and the Junior Red Cross a definite program of health education for Indian schools has been prepared and introduced in the schools.
9. A marked improvement in the personnel of the field service has evidently been due to adjustment of compensation which has been put into effect in accordance with existing law.
10. Possession of the Fort Wingate military post, Wingate, N. Mex., has been secured through the consideration of the Secretary of War, to be operated as a Government Indian school, primarily for accommodation of Navajo children who can not be given educational opportunity elsewhere.
11. Club work for Indian boys and girls has made excellent progress during the year.
This work has been extended to 53 reservations, with a membership of 1,800 as compared to 17 reservations and 400 members during the preceding year.
In addition, 2,500 boys and girls of the Five Civilized Tribes in Oklahoma have enrolled in the clubs.
12. During the year a total of 1,909 allotments of land to individual Indians were made and approved, embracing lands on various reservations approximating 595,000 acres.
One hundred and four allotments, totaling 14,684 acres, were made to Indians residing on the public domain.
13. By order of the President, the trust period was extended on allotments which had been made to Indians on the reservations at Bois Forte and Deer Creek, Minn.
Colville and Yakima, Wash.
The period of trust was also extended for 10 years on patents issued to the Twenty-nine Palms and Cabazon Bands of Mission Indians in California.
14. Sales of original allotments have been somewhat discouraged, and sales of inherited lands have been favored in the interest of good administration.
Sales of 1,161 tracts, aggregating 139,464 acres, were made, of which 764 were inherited lands and 397 original allotments or parts thereof.
15. Upon accepted showings of competency, restrictions were released on the land holdings of 556 Indians, affecting 65,300 acres.
16. The total amount of timber cut under contract from Indian lands during the fiscal year was 460,000,000 feet, and the total stumpage value thereof was $1,858,000.
The net proceeds of such sales are placed to the credit of the tribes or of the individuals and are then available for purposes beneficial to the Indians.
17. A single band sawmill has been constructed at Redby, Minn., within the Red Lake Indian Reservation.
Probably 4,000,000 feet of pine timber will be manufactured here during the sawing season of 1925, and it is hoped that this enterprise will afford employment for a large number of Red Lake Indians.
18. Construction of two telephone lines from the nearest railroad points to the agencies at Sells and Hopi, Ariz., each about 75 miles in length, was completed in June of this year.
19. Construction of public roads within Indian reservations has been continued during the year.
There have been built to date a total of 433.94 miles at an aggregate expenditure of $3,592,245.
20. Forty thousand farming and grazing leases were made on about 4,000,000 acres of allotted lands.
From these the Indians have received a cash revenue approximating $5,000,000.
21. From oil and gas leases on restricted Indian lands were produced during the fiscal year 48,138,278 barrels of oil, yielding a total revenue of $16,939,697 for the Indians.
From these leases was also derived gas which yielded an additional revenue of $1,210,616.
22. The leasing of Quapaw Indian restricted allotted lands in Oklahoma for lead and zinc mining purposes is governed by the provisions of the act of Congress of March 3, 1921, and departmental regulations thereunder.
The mines within this area supplid during the year 259,432 tons of lead and zinc concentrates, representing 20 per cent of the zinc and 8 per cent of the lead produced in the United States and yielded royalties for the benefit of the Indian owners aggregating $1,257,119.
23. The total area of irrigable land under constructed works under Indian projects approximate 636,000 acres, with an ultimate area which will approximate 1,370,000 acres.
The crops derived from the irrigated area during the year were valued at approximately $23,000,000.
Construction work has been proceeding during the year, and more than 150 projects, some small in character, have been operated and maintained.
24. At the Satus unit of the Wapato project, Yakima Reservation, Wash., construction work has been accomplished for the purpose of conserving and distributing drainage waters of this project for the benefit of the lands of the unit.
Prior to the progress of this work some concern had been evidenced that the drainage water would flow down to, and be appropriated by, lands in private ownership and thus lost to the Indians.
1. Disbursed for pensions, $217,150,612.
2. Unexpended balance of amount available for pæyment of pensions, $5,473,881.55.
3. Unexpended balance of amount appropriated for maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries of inspectors, $28,573.02.
4. Unexpended balance of amount appropriated for per diem and expenses of inspectors, $696.77.
5. Unexpended balance of amount appropriated for cost of administration of the civil service retirement law, $2,995.99.
6. Receipts for addresses, certified copies of papers, etc. (act of August 24, 1912), $5,278.91; for refundments to pension approriation, $18,607.34; miscellaneous receipts, $60.
7. Received and classified 114,168 pension claims, of which 34,978 were based on Civil War service and 56,976 on Spanish War service.
8. Disposed of 120,809 claims, of which 38,580 were on account of Civil War service and 59,031 on account of Spanish War service.
9. Issued 64,193 pension certificates, 979 reissues in lieu of lost certificates, 9,747 accrued pension orders, and 2,896 reimbursement orders, on which $119,187.21 were allowed as reimbursement for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners.
10. Prepared and mailed 6,429,998 checks in payment of pensions, df annuities, and refunds under the retirement law, and of fees and expenses of examining surgeons to amount of $226,634,205.14.
11. Under act of May 22, 1920, for retirement of employees of the dassified civil service, disbursed for annuities $6,235,830.16 and for refunds $2,713,452.16.
12. Disposed of 1,576 of the 1,695 claims for annuity on account of age, and 755 of the 930 claims for annuity on account of disability.
13. Disposed of 34,721 of the 35,934 claims for refund made by persons separated from the classified civil service.
14. The amount of the civil service retirement and disability fund on June 30, 1925, was $44,665,778.56.
15. Arranged for a survey of the executive civil service to afford the actuaries a basis for making a valuation of the civil service retirement and disability fund, as required by section 16 of the act of May 22, 1920.
By Executive order dated March 17, 1925, the President transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Commerce, the United States Patent Office, together with all appropriations, the records and all public property of said service in the District of Columbia or elsewhere, as provided in the act of February 14, 1903.
The transfer became effective from and including April 1, 1925.
1. The housing of the Bureau of Education in the Interior Building has increased the efficiency of the staff andhas made the bureau·an integral part of the Department of the Interior in policy and effort.
2. The reclassification act has been of especial benefit to the bureau by permitting a number of the educationists on the technical staff to be graded in higher positions.
Persons of greater ability are now attracted to them.
3. A program has been inaugurated which will result in more and better work with a smaller number of persons.
4. Educational surveys were made as follows: Higher education in Tennessee; higher education in Cleveland, Ohio; internal administration of Berea College, Russell Sage College, and Emma Willard School, Troy, N. Y.
Fairmont, W. Va., and Martinsburg, W. Va.
5. The Commissioner of Education spent 137 days in the field, during which he conducted 4 national conferences, and delivered 157 addresses before an aggregate of 87,410 persons.
He wrote 36 articles and held more than 310 conferences.
6. Twenty other members of the bureau's staff rendered 616 days of field service outside the District of Columbia.
Seventeen of these members delivered 185 addresses in 30 different States before audiences which aggregated 45,255 persons.
7. The activity of the bureau in research continues with excellent success.
Many important investigations have been made or are in progress, of which the following are examples: Residence and migration of university and college students, engineering curricula, standards and sources of standards in education, administrative practice in rural education, tendencies in State courses of study, curricula for the preparation of rural teachers, factors influencing attendance in rural schools, high-school education of the farm population, use of intelligence and achievement tests, nature-study courses in normal schools, motivation of arithmetic, work-study-play curricula, industrial education in penal institutions, home economics in junior and senior high schools, and relation of home economics to the social sciences.
8. Arrangements have been completed for effective coordination of the research activities conducted by agencies concerned in secondary education.
The Bureau of Education will become the clearing house and central coordinating influence.
9. Similar cooperation in relation to research in rural education has been undertaken.
10. Work has been initiated in the field of rural teacher preparation, and a specialist has been employed.
11. National conferences have been held on the platoon or workstudy-play plan of school organization, on individualized instruction, on physical education, on the objectives in manual-arts instruction, and on home education.
Many other conferences of regional or State-wide interest were conducted.
12. The assistant specialist in educational legislation cooperated with a committee of the Kentucky Education Association in codifying the school laws of Kentucky.
It is expected that the code thus produced will be introduced in the State legislature of 1926.
Similar assistance was given in the recodification of the Tennessee school laws.
13. Valuable assistance was given by the foreign education section to American higher institutions by evaluating the certificates, diplomas, and records presented by foreigners who apply for registration.
14. The collection of statistics of education in the United States for the year 1923-24 was completed and the tabulation of a large proportion of the figures was finished.
Many of the statistical chapters have already been sent to the printer.
15. The policy of strict economy which prevails throughout the Government service resulted in a material reduction in the distribution of piinted documents of the bureau.
Forty-six bulletins and 87 miscellaneous publications were issued.
The editions were, in general, unusually small.
16. The volumes and pamphlets acquired by the library by gift, exchange, or purchase amounted to 730.
Six hundred and seventy volumes were transferred from the copyright office of the Library of Congress, and 5,448 serial publications and a large number of current periodicals were also accessioned.
Approximately 1,800 volumes were loaned outside the office and many of them were forwarded by mail.
17. Cooperative arrangements for conducting the reading courses of the bureau have been established with 18 States and 1 Territory.
More than 1,500 readers were enrolled during the past year, and 131 certificates of completion were issued.
18. Only 44 per cent of the natives of Alaska were provided with educational facilities during the year, and medical relief was offered to a smaller proportion.
Eighty-five schools are operated with 154 teachers and 3,979 pupils enrolled.
Diphtheria was epidemic over Seward Peninsula and "flu"on the Bristol Bay district and on the peninsula toward the Aleutian Islands.
19. Five hospitals were maintained in Alaska.
An itinerant dentist was employed to aid the natives in southeast Alaska.
A large number of native children were brought to Seattle for special treatment.
20. Reindeer, introduced by the Bureau of Education, are rapidly increasing in Alaska, now numbering about 350,000.
Herds are numerous throughout northorn and western Alaska.
1. Made topographic maps of 17,323 square miles in the United States, 481 square miles in Hawaii, and 21,900 square miles in Alaska (including exploratory and reconnaissance).
Constructed air-route maps for the Air Service, United States Army, from New Orleans to Beaumont, Tex.
Iowa City, Iowa, to Omaha; Omaha to, North Platte, Nebr.
2. Prepared geologic State maps of Wyoming, Arizona, Alabama, and Oklahoma, the last three in cooperation with the States named.
3. Took over the work of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory.
4. Made geologic surveys in Alaska, covering 23,080 square miles.
5. Continued the investigation for the Navy Department of naval petroleum reserve No. 4, in northern Alaska.
6. Cooperated in topographic mapping with 21 States and Hawaii.
7. Cooperated with 14 State geological surveys in the collection of mineral statistics.
8. Cooperated in the study of the water resources of the United States with 30 States, the cooperating States contributing $313,815 against the Federal appropriation of $170,000.
9. Maintained 1,715 stream-measuring stations throughout the United States.
10. Made 1,077 quantitative analyses of mineral specimens and identified 3,191 specimens for the public.
11. Reported on 14,421 applications and cases involving land classification.
12. Published 187 books and pamphlets (10,966 pages) and 131 new or revised maps; reprinted 158 maps.
13. Published editions aggregating 512,994 copies of books, 6,740 geologic folios and maps, and 765,323 topographic and other maps, a total of 1,285,057.
14. Printed maps, folios, charts, etc., in a total of 3,727,389 copies.
Part of this work was done for 36 other Federal offices, to the extent of $130,000.
15. Distributed 650,842 books, 10,027 geologic folios, and 729,154 maps, a total of 1,390,023, of which 612,016 maps and folios were sold for $43,430.07.
16. The division of mineral resources and the employees connected therewith, together with, all appropriations for mineral resources and the records pertaining thereto under the Geological Survey, were transferred to the Department of Commerce under the provisions of the act of February 14, 1903 (32 Stat. 826), by Executive order dated June 4, 1925, effective July 1, 1925.
1. Continued the operation of the irrigation projects, providing a water supply for the irrigation of 1,805,730 acres of land largely on the projects proper, of which 1,290,890 acres were irrigated and 1,216,610 acres cropped, producing crops having a gross value of $66,488,560, or $54.65 an acre.
2. Furnished, in addition, a complete or partial water supply to 1,237,885 acres of land under Warren Act contracts, of which 930,670 acres were irrigated and 889,640 acres cropped, producing crops having a gross value of $43,237,470, or $49.28 an acre.
4. Operated more than 15,700 miles of canals, waste-water ditches, and drains, of which 500 miles were constructed during the fiscal year.
5. Built more than 6,000 canal structures, bringing the total constructed at the end of the year to 141,163.
6. Constructed 485 bridges, 369 culverts, 181,021 linear feet of pipe, and 236 flumes.
7. Excavated 10,874,402 cubic yards of earth and rock, making a total to the end of the fiscal year of 245,814,581 cubic yards.
8. Completed the construction of the Tieton Dam on the Yakima project, Washington, to supplement the water supply for the project and for proposed extensions.
9. Completed the Black Canyon Dam in Idaho.for the irrigation of lands in the Emmett irrigation district and possible extensions of the Boise project.
10. Virtually completed the Gerber Dam on the Klamath project, Oregon-California.
11. Continued construction of the McKay Dam for the irrigation of the greater Umatilla project, Oregon.
12. Began construction of the Guernsey Dam on the North Platte project.
13. Cooperated with the board of survey and adjustments in carrying out the provisions of subsection K of section 4 of the act of December 5, 1924, providing for a comprehensive and detailed survey of certain projects to ascertain all pertinent facts and report to Congress.
14. Completed the investigations to determine the engineering, gricultural, and economic feasibility of the Kittitas division of the Yakima project, Washington; the Baker and Vale projects, Oregon; the Owyhee project, Oregon-Idaho; the Great Salt Lake Basin project, Utah; the Spanish Springs project, Nevada; and the Willwood ¿ivision of the Shoshone project, Wyoming; and issued a comprehensive report covering these investigations.
15. Continued investigations of the feasibility of the Columbia Basin project, including the preparation of reviews of previous reports.
16. Continued studies of settlement and colonization conditions in this and other countries, with a view to the adoption of the most feasible settlement plans for Federal irrigation projects.
17. Held conferences with the colonization agents of western railroads serving the projects and with other interested individuals and organizations, with a view to coordinating the settlement activities of these organizations and the bureau.
18. Inspected a number of the projects with a view to ascertaining conditions on the ground and formulating a policy for the rehabilitation and further development of the projects in the best interests of the settlers and the Government.
19. Continued the efforts of the previous year to carry on the work of the bureau with the utmost efficiency and economy by the elimination of unnecessary work, duplication of effort, and other unbusinesslike methods.
1. Trained 24,175 men in first-aid and rescue methods—6,408 more than were trained in the preceding year.
2. Prepared to extend its safety service and to give advanced training in rescue and recovery operations after mine fires and explosions.
3. Conducted and assisted at 64 State and local first-aid meets in which the total number of competing teams was 775.
4. Rendered assistance at 38 mine accidents—33 in coal mines and 5 in metal mines.
5. Continued a campaign for the use of rock dust as a preventive of explosion disasters in bituminous coal mines.
6. Developed an extremely sensitive recorder and alarm for automatically determining the proportion of that poisonous gas, carbon monoxide, in the atmosphere of vehicular tunnels or industrial plants.
7. Showed that by the use of atmospheres composed of oxygen and helium the process of decompression to which divers and workers in caissons and submarine tunnels are subjected after working under high air pressures can be shortened, divers will possibly be able to work at greater depths, and the hazard of caisson disease will be greatly reduced.
9. Studied the hazards involved in the manufacture and use of tetraethyl lead and in handling ethyl gasoline, and the contamination of air by the exhaust gases of automobiles using ethyl gasoline.
10. Perfected apparatus for determining the dustiness of air by an impinger method.
11. In cooperation with the Public Health Service, investigated sanitary conditions in mining towns.
12. Developed a new respirator that has high efficiency in recovering dust from inhaled air and low resistance to breathing.
13. Completed a study of the methods used in mining coal at open pits.
14. Showed how explosives can be used with greater efficiency in blasting coal and how the proportion of lump coal can be increased.
15. Continued to investigate the explosion hazards of coal-mine dusts and the efficiency of different incombustible substances in preventing the propagation of dust explosions.
Studied the methods of rock dusting used in the mines of 15 coal-mining companies in the Pittsburgh district.
16. Obtained complete data for a report on drilling and blasting methods at six large open-cut copper mines.
17. Compiled and published new data for calculating the power requirements of mine ventilation systems.
18. Completed an investigation of methods of iron mining used in the Birmingham district, Alabama.
19. Continued, in cooperation with the Carnegie Institute of Technology, to investigate the friction losses of mine cars.
20. Obtained further experimental data relating to the spontaneous combustion of coal in storage.
21. Devised a heat-transmission meter for determining the loss of heat through furnace walls and the efficiency of heat-insulating materials or constructions.
22. Continued to publish reports on the characteristics of the coals of different States.
These reports contain, besides descriptions of coal fields and notes on mining methods, analyses of mine samples and of samples of delivered coal.
23. Developed a single-cell unit of a coal classifier by the use of which certain coals can be cleaned on tables with a much higher récovery of good coal.
24. Completed field work on special investigations, authorized by Congress, of peat and lignite and prepared the results of the investigations for publication in bulletin form.
25. Published a bulletin on the screen sizing of coal, ores, and other minerals, which discusses the principles of screening, the types of screens in common use, and gives suggestions on the increase of efficiency of screening plants.
26. Devised methods for determining accurately the work done in the crushing and grinding of ores and minerals.
27. Made a study of the refractory materials used in zinc-smelting plants and the possibility of obtaining suitable materials that are better than those now in use.
28. Completed an investigation of various processes for extracting alumina from clay.
29. Made a complete study of the methods used in mining limestone underground at 52 different quarries, and investigated the possibility of calcining limestone that is now wasted at quarries because of its being in small sizes.
30. Developed a process for the utilization of anhydrite, a mineral that has been mostly a waste product at many gypsum mines.
31. Completed a thorough investigation of the mining, preparation, and use of all the commercial forms of silica.
32. Demonstrated the possibility of fabricating talc into porcelains for use as electrical insulators.
33. Made further tests to determine the possibility of manufacturing high-grade refractory brick from dolomite.
34. Assisted oil-well operators in the Powell and Wortham fields, Texas, in increasing the production of oil and lessening the encroachment of water in the productive sands.
35.
Made semiannual surveys of the quality of the gasoline sold throughout the country.
36. Continued to investigate oil shales and prepared plans for a pilot shale-oil plant that the bureau is to erect in Colorado.
37. By means of an experimental blast furnace, obtained fundamental data on the smelting of manganiferous iron ores.
38. Continued investigations of the reactions that take place in the smelting of iron ores in the blast furnace.
39. Completed experimental work on the production of sponge iron and tested the melting of sponge iron in the electric furnace.
40. Developed to the commercial stage the ferric sulphate-sulphuric acid process for leaching copper ores.
41. Helped to extend the use of differential flotation for the treatment of complex ores of lead, zinc, and copper.
42. Made further contributions to the metallurgy of zinc.
43. Completed an investigation of new uses for silver.
44. Under authority of the act of February 14, 1903, entitled "An act to establish the Department of Commerce and Labor"(32 Stat. 826), and under Executive order dated June 4, 1925, the Bureau of Mines transferred from the Interior Department to the Department of Commerce, excepting employees engaged on oil-leasing work and mineral-leasing work, effective July 1, 1925.
45. The division of mineral resources in the Geological Survey, the employees connected therewith, together with all appropriations for mineral resources in the Geological Survey, and the records pertaining thereto, transferred to the Department of Commerce by Executive order of June 4, 1925, effective July 1, 1925, the work to be handled in the Bureau of Mines.
1. Handled largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the parks—1925 season, 1,760,512 visitors, as against 1,422,353 in 1924 and 1,280,886 in 1923.
2. Handled largest volume of automobile travel in the history of the national parks—1925 season, 368,212 cars, as against 315,916 in 1924 and 271,482 in 1923.
3. Handled largest volume of tourist travel in the history of the national monuments—1925 season, 347,572 visitors, as against 248,555 in 1924 and 212,826 in 1923.
4. Collected $670,920.98 in revenues from the operation of the national parks and monuments, as against $663,886.32 in 1924 and $513,706.36 in 1923.
5. Accepted, through the department, deed giving title to tract of land for inclusion in Lafayette National Park; also donations of money and other gifts from park friends.
6. Secured donation of $10,500 for use in cleaning up the roadsides in Yellowstone National Park.
7. Assumed charge of two new national‘monuments created by presidential proclamation during the year.
These were the Wupatki in Arizona and Glacier Bay in Alaska.
8. Stimulated use of national parks for winter sports.
Ten of these reservations were open last winter.
9. Afforded protection to the wild life of the parks and monuments and cooperated with the Bureau of Animal Industry and the Biological Survey in controlling the hoof-and-mouth disease among deer in Yosemite National Park.
10. Cooperated with the Bureau of Fisheries and with State hatcheries in fish planting in park lakes and streams.
11. Cooperated with the Bureau of Entomology in insect-control work in park forests.
12. Continued cooperation with the Public Health Service in improving sanitary conditions in the national parks.
13. Continued operation of Government free bathhouse in Hot Springs National Park, giving a total of 73,841 baths to 3,441 persons.
Also examined and treated 3,411 persons in the free clinic in cooperation with the Public Health Service.
14. Carried on repair and restoration of ruins in the Mesa Verde National Park and in eight monuments in the southwestern group, and continucd under permit archeological investigations of the National Geographic Society in the Chaco Canyon National Monument.
15. Expanded the educational facilities in the national parks.
16. Arranged for improved facilities of public utilities and expanded public camp grounds for motorists.
17. Carried on road construction and reconstruction in the national parks and monuments under appropriations of $2,500,000 granted by Congress for this work.
In connection with this work secured cooperation of Bureau of Public Roads.
18. Through the field office of the civil engineering division, handled the minutia of detail involved in preparing specifications, calling for bids, and entering into contracts for road work, as well as directing construction of certain roads hy force account.
19. Through landscape engineering division handled increased problems due to road development program under way in many of the parks and generally improved landscape conditions in the parks.
20. Cooperated with national conference on State parks in the stimulation of interest in State parks and in securing definite business organization of conference.
21. Cooperated with highway, automobile, and other associations, as well as with newspapers and magazines, in dissemination of information regarding parks and monuments and the loaning of photographs for publicity purposes.
22. Prepared and distributed 470,202 publications relating to the national parks and monuments.
23. Prepared and distributed 111,500 automobile and other maps of the national parks and 196,000 park windshield stickers.
24. Cooperated with other Government bureaus in showing on their map publications accurate locations of parks and monuments.
25. Cooperated with the National Capital Park Commission, of which the director is a member, and with the President's Conference on Outdoor Recreation.
26. Placed records of the National Park Service at disposal of the subcommittee of the Senate on Public Lands and Surveys investigating the public domain, and furnished all possible assistance to promote investigation.
The following table shows the number of matters received and disposed of during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1925.
The table is confined to matters docketed and recorded and does not include a large number of miscellaneous matters of which no formal record is kept.
It does not show in detail the numerous hearings, oral consultations, and personal interviews relating to important business transacted by the office.
An analysis of the report, comparing it with the report for last year, shows a substantial decrease in the number of public-land appeals docketed and a slight decrease in the number of cases decided.
The arrears have consequently lessened: 360 pending cases (appeals and motions), contrasted with 659 a year ago.
On the other hand, pension appeals have increased.
The number disposed of is substantially that shown in last year's report; the appeals and motions filed, however, exceeding by 178 the number docketed in the preceding year.
As a result, the number of pending cases this year is 172 more than the arrears of 1923-24.
In war mineral matters, the work is practically ended.
Two cases in the Supreme Court of the United States, to which reference was made in the annual report of this office last year, were decided in favor of the Secretary, thus enabling the complete closing of the work, which, however, is temporarily embarrassed by the pendency of a few cases not yet finally disposed of by the courts of the District of Columbia.
In miscellaneous matters, which embrace a vast number of interests and time-consuming affairs, a large increase in dècketed cases is observed—about 3,500 more than were received during the year ending June 30, 1924.
Moreover, this increase, very marked during the last four months of the fiscal year, is not abating; so that the total number of cases bøfore which the office will be required to pass during the year ending June 30, 1926, will unquestionably far exceed the number shown in this report.
During this last year the office passed upon 21,770 different matters, while in the year 1923–24 the number was 18,971; notwithstanding which, and with a diminished force, the total arrears is 48 less than on June 30, 1924.
In court matters, 18 new suits and actions were filed.
Six cases were decided in the United States Supreme Court, all in favor of the Secretary, in three instances reversing prior adverse decisions in the Court of Appeals.
In the latter court, 11 cases were disposed of; 4 adversely to the department.
Fifteen cases in the Supreme Court were also disposed of; in one instance the decree being against the department.
There are now pending 37 cases: Supreme Court of the United States, 6; Court of Appeals, 7; Supreme Court of the District, 24.
Five of the latter have been argued and submitted.
The fiscal year 1925 was a period of advancement on the Alaska Railroad, in efficiency and economy of operation.
Careful study was made of all departments for the purpose of eliminating superfluous employees, abolishing all unnecessary positions, consolidating the work of the departments where possible to prevent duplication of work, loading trains and cars to more nearly their capacity, restriction of train service to the actual necessities so far as consistent with reasonable regularity of service, the economical use and purchase of material, the economical handling of work, and similar matters were given careful supervision.
Losses in operation have been reviewed, and such operations as were being conducted at a' loss and could be discontinued were stopped.
The most notable example of this is the dining-car service.
Some progress was made in the completion of the railroad by the substitution of permanent steel bridges for wooden trestles, the filling of other trestles, widening cuts and banks, riprapping, and the placing of additional gravel under the ties, all of which will result in deoreased œst of maintenance in the future.
Further economy can be effected, but the amount will be small, except such as can be made by the expenditures for the completion of the railroad and for improvement of fixtures and purchases of equipment and appliances.
This field offers attractive opportunities for decreases in maintenance and operation costs.
Economy effected.
The economy effected can be shown by comparison of pay rolls.
For 1924 the pay roll amounted to $2,498,430.91 and.
Revenue received decreased $45,937 for the year 1925, but when it is explained that this decrease was almost entirely due to the decrease in the shipment of Mayo ore, brought about by a necessity for development work at the Mayo mine, the result is very encouraging, because it shows that with this large decrease in expenditure by the railroad, which in turn means that the purchases made by the employees were correspondingly reduced and shipments over the road for these reasons decreased, there was enough advancement in the business in the railroad belt, aside from the railroad activities, to offset the decreased purchasing power of employees.
Further, the decrease shown in revenue was in part due to the elimination of activities on the part of the railroad, such as operation of the dining cars, previously rferred to, that were operated at a loss.
An estimate of $11,878,781 was made for the cost of completing the railroad and providing such additional facilities and equipment s would be necessary for efficient and economical operation of the lime and to enable the railroad to function in accordance with the purposes for which it was constructed, namely, the proper serving of the territory through which it passed for the purpose of the development of the country.
All of the work contemplated in the estimate, if completed, will either produce ample returns on the capital imvested, in decreased costs of maintenance and operation, or will provide the necessary facilities and equipment for the functioning of the road as above stated.
While no rapid development of the resources of the Territory can be looked for in the next few years, there is every indication of a gadual and healthy growth in traffic for the railroad as a result of the development of the resources, which is now taking place in a' more businesslike and substantial manner than in the past.
So that, while there is no prospect that the operation of the railroad can be ontinued for some years to come without substantial appropriations being made to meet the deficit in operations incurred there is every reason to believe that eventually the railroad may be operated without such appropriations.
The date at which this desired conditiom vill be realized is dependent to a very great extent on the progress hat can be made in the completion of the line, and such progress is dependent on the appropriations made for that purpose.
The situation as it now exists with reference to maintenance and operation is ne of economic waste, in that, due to the necessarily hasty constructon of the line the work performed in repairing the line and putting it i shape after the frost has come out of the ground in the spring is ot lasting, and the same work has to again be performed the following spring.
This condition can only be relieved by placing the railroad in such physical condition that the damage sustained during the winter will be reduced.
The most important factors are the replacement of bridges supported on wooden piling with bridges supported on permanent masonry; the replacing of trestles, where necessary, with bridges or culverts and the filling of trestles not necessary; the placing of sufficient ballast under the ties to eliminate the damage to the track now suffered by frost heaves during the winter months due to insufficient ballast; the widening of cuts and fills to decrease the cost of necessary maintenance work incident to narrow cuts and fills and to decrease the expense of removing slides and replacing the sluffing of the banks and fills; the riprapping of banks and the raising of the grade above normal high water to eliminate the constant temporary repairing due to floods.
In addition to saving in maintenance costs the hazards to passengers and employees will be reduced, the losses from destruction of the line by floods, snow slides and rock slides, and the loss of property by fire, on which no insurance is carried, will be diminished.
Numerous improvements, no item of which is very large in itself, can be made that will decrease operating costs; the same is also true of introduction of labor-saving devices and appliances in the various departments.
Completion of the Alaska Railroad.
Bridge No. 1275, Eagle River, rebuilt.
New bridge consists of two 74-foot, one 80-foot, and one 40-foot span steel bridge supported on towers.
Bridge No. 3707, ferry, over Nenana River, rebuilt.
New bridge consists of two 200-foot steel truss spans and one 80-foot steel halfthrough girder.
Bridge D-10, Healy River spur, over Nenana River, rebuilt.
New bridge consists of four 80-foot steel half-through girders.
Work started on filling the trestle approaches at bridges 3707 and D-10 and on the masonry for bridge 3609 at Dry Creek.
Concrete piles built at Anchorage for bridge 4321.
Engine house moved from Nenana to Healy.
Three cottages and dormatory moved from Chickaloon to Curry.
Car repair shop built at Anchorage.
Old boiler house at Anchorage remodeled for use as a coal-testing laboratory for Bureau of Mines.
Cooling tower built and trestle changed at Anchorage power plant.
Snowshed 714 extended 100 feet at south end and 52 feet on north end.
Snowshed 531 extended 48 feet.
Track between miles 3 and 6 raised from 312 to 6 feet to place it above the flood level of the glacial streams; 172 cubic yards gravel and 47.956 cubic yards rock used.
Approximately 108,471 crossties renewed.
The completion of the above items of work will result in decreased future costs of maintenance.
Train operation.
From the beginning of the fiscal year until August 31 three passenger trains a week in each direction were operated between Seward and Fairbanks with dining and sleeping-car service, the trains making a continuous run between the two terminals.
On August 31 this service was changed to two passenger trains a week in each direction between the two terminals and dining-car and sleeping-car service discontinued, the trains remaining overnight at the Curry Hotel and stopping for the noonday meals at Anchorage and Healy.
On June 21, 1925, the summer schedule was put into effect of three trains per week in each direction between the two terminals but without dining and sleeping-car service, the trains remaining overnight at Curry and stopping for meals en route.
In both the summer schedules a train was run in each direction on Sunday between Anchorage and Seward for the purpose of affording a connection to the Alaska steamships which are scheduled to leave Seward, in the summer months, for Seattle at 4 p.
This Sunday schedule is so arranged that a round trip can be made from Seward to Moraine and return, and quite a few tourists or round-trip passengers on the steamships have availed themselves of this opportunity to get a glimpse of Alaskan scenery.
The passenger trains leaving Seward on Sunday and Monday and arriving there on Saturday and Sunday are operating parlor-observation cars, which ue also operated on midweek trains, but only when.there are a mfficient number of passengers to justify such operation.
From July 1 until August 31 three freight trains a week in each direction were scheduled to go between Seward and Fairbanks.
On the latter date the schedules were discontinued and the freight trains were run as extras as needed.
With the present summer business the freight service is adequately taken care of by the running of two freight trains per week in each direction between the terminals with only an occasional additional freight movement being made.
Maintenance-of-way department.
The history of the maintenanceof-way department is that of a constant struggle against adverse conditions.
The work performed in the summer season is to a great axtent destroyed by the severe winter conditions due to excessive heaving of the roadbed in cold weather and snow and rock slides and foods.
The general condition of the track and structures at the end of this fiscal year was far better than it was a year ago and at this , time compares favorably with railroads of like traffic, so far as the line and surface of the track and the physical condition of the various types of structures are concerned.
River boat service.
The river boat traffic was not as heavy this year as in the previous fiscal year due to large stocks of supplies being carried over by the merchants and operators on the river from the previous year.
The increase in shipments this season indicates that this surplus stock is now exhausted.
Tons of freight handled in 1924, 3,543; tons of freight handled in 1925, 3,125; passengers handled in 1924, 792; passengers handled in 1925, 833.
Traffic.
Total tons of commercial freight handled in 1925 was 53,865, a decrease of 5,667 tons, or 9.5 per cent.
This decrease was due, almost entirely, to decreased shipments of Mayo ore, of which 6,892 tons were shipped in 1924 and but 1,372 tons in 1925.
Commercial coal shipments increased from 27,884 tons in 1924 to 28,426 tons in 1925.
Commercial loading of vessels at Anchorage in 1924 amounted to 1,532 tons and in 1925 to 2,104 tons, and at Seward 1,016 tons in 1924 and 1,492 tons in 1925.
Rail freight revenue in 1925 was $412,194 a decrease of $20,980, or 4.8 per cent.
Rail passengers handled in 1925 were 48,300, a decrease of 1,165, or 2.4 per cent.
Rail passenger revenuewas $171,552, an increase of $2,413, or 1.4 per cent.
Tourist business.
Tourist business indicates an increase over past season, but the records are not such as to make absolute comparison possible.
The Frank Reedy tourist party of Dallas, Tex., numbering about 94 people, was the only tourist party moved by special train over our line.
Increased interest is being shown by the tourist agencies in Alaskan trips.
During the fiscal year 1925 we handled one party of tourists who came in from Skagway, over the White Pass & Yukon Railroad, down the river from Dawson by steamboat to Nenana, and over the Alaska Railroad to Seward.
The fiscal year report for 1926 will show an increase of travel by this route.
See Appendix E for statement of appropriations and expenditures'and miscellaneous traffic statistics.)
Since the transfer under Executive order of July 15, 1909, of the supervision of affairs in Porto Rico to the Insular Bureau of the War Department, the former Territories of New Mexico and Arizona have been admitted as States, and there now remains under this department the supervision of but two Territories—Alaska and Hawaii.
In a territory as large as Alaska it is to be expected that some districts will show greater progress than others; this is especially true in those regions where fishing is the chief industry.
Because of the scarcity of local labor in some districts and the short fishing seasons the canneries must depend to a large extent on labor imported from outside the Territory.
Further study may solve this problem by evolving a plan for the develópment of diversified fishing which will provide almost continwous employment for this labor.
If this can be brought about it will result in a substantial increase in the permanent population in the coastal regions.
Roads.
The work of the Alaska Road Commission during the cal year was largely directed to extending the general rehabilitation to trails and roads in remote portions of the Territory begun in 1920.
The total expended for all construction and maintenance to June 30, :925, was $9,501,847.42.
Of this amount $6,053,611.67 was appropriated by acts of Congress, $2,858,430.81 was allotted from the Mlaska fund and $589,804.94 from Territorial appropriations and xntributions.
A total of 170 miles of road has been maintained for the year by the Bureau of Public Roads, Department of Agriculture, whose sctivities cover the area within or adjacent to the national forests.
The funds expended for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1925, amounted ω $415,785.34.
Alaska fisheries.
The value of the fishery products in 1924 and so the investment in the fisheries industry as a whole increased spproximately 4 per cent over the previous year, the chief expansion being in the herring industry.
The salmon catch in the central istrict was more than 161 per cent greater than for 1923, while the stern and southeastern districts show decreases of 32 and 18 per xnt, respectively.
The total value of Alaska fishery products in 1924, exclusive of aquatic furs, was $40,289,273, an increase of $l.610,448 over the preceding year, when they were valued at 35.678,825.
The census of the seal herd on the Pribilof Islands indicates a substantial gain, and the revenue derived from the sale of sealskins was more than $700,000.
The Bureau of Fisheries maintains a herd of xes, both blue and white, on the islands.
The return from the sale f fox skins in 1924 amounted to about $50,000.
Under the terms of the existing treaty between the United States, Great Britain, Japan, and Russia 15 per cent of the skins taken each ear are delivered to Great Britain and 15 per cent to Japan.
It would be of great benefit to Alaska if a part of the returns from the ssle of seals and foxes could be given to the Territory for the maintenance and extension of the public school system outside of incorporated towns.
It is realized that a part of the revenues should be available for improvements on the Pribilof Islands and this should be expended by the Department of Commerce.
However, the amount thus expended should be limited to 50 per cent of the net returns and at least 50 per cent allotted to the Territory for the yearly support of the common schools.
Senate bill 2122, introduced January 21, 1924, and favorably reported by the Committee on Commerce, provided for the creation and distribution of a fund out of the proceedsform the seals and foxes, but the schools would receive only 30 per cent of the money allotted to the Alaska fund.