Members of the Congress: In meeting the constitutional requirement of informing the Congress upon the state of the Union, it is exceedingly gratifying to report that the general condition is one of progress and prosperity.
Here and there are comparatively small and apparently temporary difficulties needing adjustment and improved administrative methods, such as are always to be expected, but in the fundamentals of government and business the results demonstrate that we are going in the right direction.
The country does not appear to require radical departures from the policies already adopted so much as it needs a further extension of these policies and the improvement of details.
The age of perfection is still in the somewhat distant future, but it is more in danger of being retarded by mistaken Government activity than it is from lack of legislation.
We are by far the most likely to accomplish permanent good if we proceed with moderation.
In our country the people are sovereign and independent, and must accept the resulting responsibilities.
It is their duty to support themselves and support the Government.
That is the business of the Nation, whatever the charity of the Nation may require.
The functions which the Congress are to discharge are not those of local government but of National Government.
The greatest solicitude should be exercised to prevent any encroachment upon the rights of the States or their various political subdivisions.
Local self-government is one of our most precious possessions.
It is the greatest contributing factor to the stability strength liberty, and progress of the Nation.
It ought not to be in ringed by assault or undermined by purchase.
It ought not to abdicate its power through weakness or resign its authority through favor.
It does not at all follow that because abuses exist it is the concern of the Federal Government to attempt their reform.
Society is in much more danger from encumbering the National Government beyond its wisdom to comprehend, or its ability to administer, than from leaving the local communities to bear their own burdens and remedy their own evils.
Our local habit and custom is so strong, our variety of race and creed is so great the Federal authority is so tenuous, that the area within which it can function successfully is very limited.
The wiser policy is to leave the localities, so far as we can, possessed of their own sources of revenue and charged with their own obligations.
GOVERNMENT ECONOMY It is a fundamental principle of our country that the people are sovereign.
While they recognize the undeniable authority of the state, they have established as its instrument a Government of limited powers.
They hold inviolate in their own hands the jurisdiction over their own freedom and the ownership of their own property.
Neither of these can be impaired except by due process of law.
The wealth of our country is not public wealth, but private wealth.
It does not belong to the Government, it belongs to the people.
The Government has no justification in taking private Property except for a public purpose.
It is always necessary to keep these principles in mind in the laying of taxes and in the making of appropriations.
No right exists to levy on a dollar, or to order the expenditure of a dollar, of the money of the people, except for a necessary public purpose duly authorized by the Constitution.
The power over the purse is the power over liberty.
That is the legal limitation within which the Congress can act, How it will, proceed within this limitation is always a question of policy.
When the country is prosperous and free from debt, when the rate of taxation is low, opportunity exists for assuming new burdens and undertaking new enterprises.
Such a condition now prevails only to a limited extent.
All proposals for assuming new obligations ought to be postponed, unless they are reproductive capital investments or are such as are absolutely necessary at this time.
We still have an enormous debt of over $20,000,000,000, on which the interest and sinking-fund requirements are $1,320,000,000.
Our appropriations for the Pension Office and the Veterans' Bureau are $600,000,000.
The War and Navy Departments call for $642,000,000.
Other requirements, exclusive of the Post Office ' which is virtually self-sustaining, brought the appropriations for the current year up to almost $3,100,060,000.
This shows an expenditure of close to $30 for every inhabitant of our country.
For the average family of five it means a tax, directly or indirectly paid, of about $150 for national purposes alone.
The local tax adds much more.
These enormous expenditures ought not to be increased, but through every possible effort they ought to be reduced.
Only one of these great items can be ultimately extinguished.
That is the item of our war debt.
Already this has been reduced to about $6,000,000,000, which means an annual saving in interest of close to $250,000,000.
The present interest charge is about $820,000,000 yearly.
It would seem to be obvious that the sooner this debt can be retired the more the taxpayers will save in interest and the easier it will be to secure funds with which to prosecute needed running expenses, constructions, and improvements.
This item of $820,000,000 for interest is a heavy charge on all the people of the country, and it seems to me that we might well consider whether it is not greatly worth while to dispense with it as early as possible by retiring the principal debt which it is required to serve.
It has always been our policy to retire our debts.
That of the Revolutionary War period, notwithstanding the additions made in 1812, was paid by 1835.
and the Civil War debt within 23 years.
Of the amount already paid, over $1,000,000,000 is a reduction in cash balances.
That source is exhausted.
Over one and two-thirds billions of dollars was derived from excess receipts.
Tax reduction eliminates that.
The sale of surplus war materials has been another element of our income.
That is practically finished.
With these eliminated, the reduction of the debt has been only about $500,000,000 each year, not an excessive sum on so large a debt.
Proposals have been made to extend the payment over a period of 62 years.
If $1,000,000,000 is paid at the end of 20 years, the cost to the taxpayers is the principal and, I f the interest is 4% per cent, a total of $1,850,000,000.
If the same sum is paid at the end of 62 years, the cost is $3,635,000,000, or almost double.
Here is another consideration: Compared with its purchasing power in 1913, the dollar we borrowed represented but 52 cents.
As the value of our dollar increases, due to the falling prices of commodities, the burden of our debt increases.
It has now risen to 631/2 cents.
The taxpayer will be required to produce nearly twice the amount of commodities to pay his debt if the dollar returns to the 1913 value.
The more we pay while prices are high, the easier it will be.
Deflation of government after a war period is slower than deflation of business, where curtailment is either prompt and effective or disaster follows.
There is room for further economy in the cost of the Federal Government, but a co n of current expenditures with pre-war expenditures is not able to the efficiency with which Government business is now being done.
The expenditures of 19161 the last pre-war year, were $742,000,000, and in 1925 over $3,500,000,000, or nearly five times as great.
If we subtract expenditures for debt retirements and interest, veterans' relief, increase of pensions, and other special outlays, consisting of refunds, trust investments, and like charges, we find that the general expenditures of the Government in 1925 were slightly more than twice as large as in 1916.
As prices in 1925 were approximately 40 per cent higher than in 1916, the cost of the same Government must also have increased.
But the Government is not the same.
It is more expensive to collect the much greater revenue necessary and to administer our great debt.
We have given enlarged and improved services to agriculture and commerce.
Above all, America has grown in population and wealth.
Government expenditures must always share in this growth.
Taking into account the factors I have mentioned, I believe that present Federal expenses are not far out of line with pre-war expenses.
We have nearly accomplished the deflation.
This does not mean that further economies will not come.
As we reduce our debt our interest charges decline.
There are many details yet to correct.
The real improvement, however, must come not from additional curtailment of expenses, but by a more intelligent, more ordered spending.
Our economy must be constructive.
While we should avoid as far as possible increases in permanent current expenditures, oftentimes a capital outlay like internal improvements will result in actual constructive saving.
That is economy in its best sense.
It is an avoidance of waste that there may be the means for an outlay to-day which will bring larger returns to-morrow.
We should constantly engage in scientific studies of our future requirements and adopt an orderly program for their service.
Economy is the method by which we prepare to-day to afford the improvements of to-morrow.
A mere policy of economy without any instrumentalities for putting it into operation would be very ineffective.
The Congress has wisely set up the Bureau of the Budget to investigate and inform the President what recommendations he ought to make for current appropriations.
This gives a centralized authority where a general and comprehensive understanding can be reached of the sources of income and the most equitable distribution of expenditures.
How well it has worked is indicated by the fact that the departmental estimates for 1922, before the budget law, were $4,068,000,000 while the Budget estimates for 1927 are $3,156,000,000.
This latter figure shows the reductions in departmental estimates for the coming year made possible by the operation of the Budget system that the Congress has provided.
But it is evidently not enough to have care in making appropriations without any restraint upon expenditure.
The Congress has provided that check by establishing the office of Comptroller General.
The purpose of maintaining the Budget Director and the Comptroller General is to secure economy and efficiency in Government expenditure.
No better method has been devised for the accomplishment of that end.
These offices can not be administered in all the various details without making some errors both of fact and of judgment.
But the important consideration remains that these are the instrumentalities of the Congress and that no other plan has ever been adopted which was so successful in promoting economy and efficiency.
The Congress has absolute authority over the appropriations and is free to exercise its judgment, as the evidence may warrant, in increasing or decreasing budget recommendations.
But it ought to resist every effort to weaken or break down this most beneficial system of supervising appropriations and expenditures.
Without it all the claim of economy would be a mere pretense.
TAXATION
The purpose of reducing expenditures is to secure a reduction in taxes.
That purpose is about to be realized.
With commendable promptness the Ways and Means Committee of the House has undertaken in advance of the meeting of the Congress to frame a revenue act.
As the bill has proceeded through the committee it has taken on a nonpartisan character, and both Republicans and Democrats have joined in a measure which embodies many sound principles of tax reform.
The bill will correct substantially the economic defects injected into the revenue act of 1924, as well as many which have remained as war-time legacies.
In its present form it should provide sufficient revenue for the Government.
The excessive surtaxes have been reduced, estate tax rates are restored to more reasonable figures, with every prospect of withdrawing from the field when the States have had the opportunity to correct the abuses in their own inheritance tax laws, the gift tax and publicity section are to be repealed many miscellaneous taxes are lowered or abandoned, and the Board of Tax Appeals and the administrative features of the law are improved and strengthened.
I approve of the bill in principle.
In so far as income-tax exemptions are concerned, it seems to me the committee has gone as far as it is safe to go and somewhat further than I should have gone.
Any further extension along these lines would, in my opinion, impair the integrity of our income-tax system.
I am advised that the bill will be through the House by Christmas.
For this prompt action the country can thank the good sense of the Ways and Means Committee in framing an economic measure upon economic considerations.
If this attitude continues to be reflected through the Congress, the taxpayer will have his relief by the time his March 15th installment of income taxes is due.
Nonpartisan effort means certain, quick action.
Determination of a revenue law definitely, promptly and solely as a revenue law, is one of the greatest gifts a legislature can bestow upon its constituents.
I commend the example of the Ways and Means Committee.
If followed, it will place sound legislation upon the books in time to give the taxpayers the full benefit of tax reduction next year.
This means that the bill should reach me prior to March 15.
All these economic results are being sought not to benefit the rich, but to benefit the people.
They are for the purpose of encouraging industry in order that employment may be plentiful.
They seek to make business good in order that wages may be good.
They encourage prosperity in order that poverty may be banished from the home.
They seek to lay the foundation which, through increased production, may give the people a more bountiful supply of the necessaries of life, afford more leisure for the improvement of the mind, the appreciation of the arts of music and literature, sculpture and painting, and the beneficial enjoyment of outdoor sports and recreation, enlarge the resources which minister to charity and by all these means attempting to strengthen the spiritual life of the Nation.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
The policy of our foreign relations, casting aside any suggestion of force, rests solely on the foundation of peace, good will, and good works.
We have sought, in our intercourse with other nations, better understandings through conference and exchange of views as befits beings endowed with reason.
The results have been the gradual elimination of disputes, the settlement of controversies, and the establishment of a firmer friendship between America and the rest of the world that has ever existed at any previous time.
The example of this attitude has not been without its influence upon other countries.
