Members of the Congress: In reporting to the Congress the state of the Union, I find it impossible to characterize it other than one of general peace and prosperity.
In some quarters our diplomacy is vexed with difficult and as yet unsolved problems, but nowhere are we met with armed conflict.
If some occupations and areas are not flourishing, in none does there remain any acute chronic depression.
What the country requires is not so much new policies as a steady continuation of those which are already being crowned with such abundant success.
It can not be too often repeated that in common with all the world we are engaged in liquidating the war.
In the present short session no great amount of new legislation is possible, but in order to comprehend what is most desirable some survey of our general situation is necessary.
A large amount of time is consumed in the passage of appropriation bills.
If each Congress in its opening session would make appropriations to continue for two years, very much time would be saved which could either be devoted to a consideration of the general needs of the country or would result in decreasing the work of legislation.
ECONOMY Our present state of prosperity has been greatly promoted by three important causes, one of which is economy, resulting in reduction and reform in national taxation.
Another is the elimination of many kinds of waste.
The third is a general raising of the standards of efficiency.
This combination has brought the perfectly astonishing result of a reduction in the index price of commodities and an increase in the index rate of wages.
We have secured a lowering of the cost to produce and a raising of the ability to consume.
Prosperity resulting from these causes rests on the securest of all foundations.
It gathers strength from its own progress.
In promoting this progress the chief part which the National Government plays lies in the field of economy.
Whatever doubts may have been entertained as to the necessity of this policy and the beneficial results which would accrue from it to all the people of the Nation, its wisdom must now be considered thoroughly demonstrated.
It may not have appeared to be a novel or perhaps brilliant conception, but it has turned out to be preeminently sound.
It has not failed to work.
It has surely brought results.
It does not have to be excused as a temporary expedient adopted as the lesser evil to remedy some abuse, it is not.
a palliative seeking to treat symptoms, but a major operation for the, eradication at the source of a large number of social diseases.
Nothing is easier than the expenditure of public money.
It does not appear to belong to anybody.
The temptation is overwhelming to bestow it on somebody.
But the results of extravagance are ruinous.
The property of the country, like the freedom of the country, belongs to the people of the country.
They have not empowered their Government to take a dollar of it except for a necessary public purpose.
But if the Constitution conferred such right, sound economics would forbid it.
Nothing is more, destructive of the progress of the Nation than government extravagance.
It means an increase in the burden of taxation, dissipation of the returns from enterprise, a decrease in the real value of wages, with ultimate stagnation and decay.
The whole theory of our institutions is based on the liberty and independence of the individual.
He is dependent on himself for support and therefore entitled to the rewards of his own industry.
He is not to be deprived of what he earns that others may be benefited by what they do not earn.
What lie saves through his private effort is not to be wasted by Government extravagance.
Our national activities have become so vast that it is necessary to scrutinize each item of public expenditure if we are to apply the principle of economy.
At the last session we made an immediate increase in the annual budget of more than $100,000,000 in benefits conferred on the veterans of three wars, public buildings, and river and harbor improvement.
Many projects are being broached requiring further large outlays.
I am convinced that it would be greatly for the welfare of the country if we avoid at the present session all commitments except those of the most pressing nature.
From a reduction of the debt and taxes will accrue a wider benefit to all the people of this country than from embarking on any new enterprise.
When our war debt is decreased we shall have resources for expansion.
Until that is accomplished we should confine ourselves to expenditures of the most urgent necessity.
The Department of Commerce has performed a most important function in making plans and securing support of all kinds of national enterprise for the elimination of waste.
Efficiency has been greatly promoted through good management and the constantly increasing cooperation of the wage earners throughout the whole realm of private business.
It is my opinion that this whole development has been predicated on the foundation of a protective tariff.
TAX REDUCTION As a result of economy of administration by the Executive and of appropriation by the Congress, the end of this fiscal year will leave a surplus in the Treasury estimated at $383,000,000.
Unless otherwise ordered, such surplus is used for the retirement of the war debt.
A bond which can be retired today for 100 cents will cost the, people 104 1/4 cents to retire a year from now.
While I favor a speedy reduction of the debt as already required by law and in accordance with the promises made to the holders of our Liberty bonds when they were issued, there is no reason why a balanced portion of surplus revenue should not be applied to a reduction of taxation.
It can not be repeated too often that the enormous revenues of this Nation could not be collected without becoming a charge on all the people whether or not they directly pay taxes.
Everyone who is paying or the bare necessities of fool and shelter and clothing, without considering the better things of life, is indirectly paying a national tax.
The nearly 20,000,000 owners of securities, the additional scores of millions of holders of insurance policies and depositors in savings banks, are all paying a national tax.
Millions of individuals and corporations are making a direct contribution to the National Treasury which runs from 11/2 to 25 per cent of their income, besides a number of special requirements, like automobile and admission taxes.
Whenever the state of the Treasury will permit, I believe in a reduction of taxation.
I think the taxpayers are entitled to it.
But I am not advocating tax reduction merely for the benefit of the taxpayer; I am advocating it for the benefit of the country.
If it appeared feasible, I should welcome permanent tax reduction at this time.
The estimated surplus, however, for June 30, 1928, is not much larger than is required in a going business of nearly $4,000,000,000.
We have had but a few months' experience under the present revenue act and shall need to know what is developed by the returns of income produced under it, which are not required t o be made until about the time this session terminates, and what the economic probabilities of the country are in the latter part of 1927, before we can reach any justifiable conclusion as to permanent tax reduction.
Moreover the present surplus results from many nonrecurrent items.
Meantime, it is possible to grant some real relief by a simple measure making reductions in the payments which accrue on the 15th of March and June, 1927.
1 am very strongly of the conviction that this is so much a purely business matter that it ought not to be dealt with in a partisan spirit.
The Congress has already set the notable example of treating tax problems without much reference to party, which might well be continued.
What I desire to advocate most earnestly is relief for the country from unnecessary tax burdens.
We can not secure that if we stop to engage in a partisan controversy.
As I do not think any change in the special taxes, or tiny permanent reduction is practical, I therefore urge both parties of the House Ways and Means Committee to agree on a bill granting the temporary relief which I have indicated.
Such a reduction would directly affect millions of taxpayers, release large sums for investment in new enterprise, stimulating industrial production and agricultural consumption, and indirectly benefiting every family in the whole country.
These are my convictions stated with full knowledge that it is for the Congress to decide whether they judge it best to make such a reduction or leave the surplus for the present year to be applied to retirement of the war debt.
That also is eventually tax reduction.
PROTECTIVE TARIFF It is estimated that customs receipts for the present fiscal year will exceed $615,000,000, the largest which were ever secured from that source.
The value of our imports for the last fiscal year was $4,466,000,000, an increase of more than 71 per cent since the present tariff law went into effect.
Of these imports about 65 per cent, or, roughly, $2,900,000,000, came in free of duty, which means that the United States affords a duty-free market to other countries almost equal in value to the total imports of Germany and greatly exceeding the total imports of France.
We have admitted a greater volume of free imports than any other country except England.
We are, therefore, levying duties on about $1,550,000,000 of imports.
Nearly half of this, or $700,000,000, is subject to duties for the protection of agriculture and have their origin in countries other than Europe.
They substantially increased the prices received by our farmers for their produce.
About $300,000.000 more is represented by luxuries such as costly rugs, furs, precious stones, etc.
This leaves only about $550,000,000 of our imports under a schedule of duties which is in general under consideration when there is discussion of lowering the tariff.
While the duties on this small portion, representing only about 12 per cent of our imports, undoubtedly represent the difference between a fair degree of prosperity or marked depression to many of our industries and the difference between good pay and steady work or wide unemployment to many of our wage earners, it is impossible to conceive how other countries or our own importers could be greatly benefited if these duties are reduced.
Those who are starting an agitation for a reduction of tariff duties, partly at least for the benefit of those to whom money has been lent abroad, ought to know that there does not seem to be a very large field within the area of our imports in which probable reductions would be advantageous to foreign goods.
Those who wish to benefit foreign producers are much more likely to secure that result by continuing the present enormous purchasing power which comes from our prosperity that hall?' increased our imports over 71 per cent in four years than from any advantages that are likely to accrue from a general tariff reduction.
AGRICULTURE The important place which agriculture holds in the economic and social life of the Nation can not be overestimated.
The National Government is justified in putting forth every effort to make the open country a desirable place to live.
No condition meets this requirement which fails to supply a fair return on labor expended and capital invested.
While some localities and some particular crops furnish exceptions, in general agriculture is continuing to make progress in recovering from the depression of 1921 and 1922.
Animal products and food products are in a more encouraging position, while cotton, due to the high prices of past years supplemented by ideal weather conditions, has been stimulated to a point of temporary over production.
Acting on the request of the cotton growing interests, appointed a committee to assist in carrying out their plans.
As it result of this cooperation sufficient funds have been pledged to finance the storage and carrying of 4,000,000 bales of cotton.
Whether those who own the cotton are willing to put a part of their stock into this plan depends on themselves.
The Federal Government has cooperated in providing ample facilities.
No method of meeting the situation would be adequate which does not contemplate a reduction of about one-third in the acreage for the coming year.
The responsibility for making the plan effective lies with those who own and finance cotton and cotton lands.
The Department of Agriculture estimates the net income of agriculture for the year 1920-21 at only $375,000,000; for 1924-25, $2,656,000,000; for 1925-26, $2,757,000,000.
This increase has been brought about in part by the method already referred to, of Federal tax reduction, the elimination of waste, and increased efficiency in industry.
The wide gap that existed a few years ago between the index price of agricultural products and the index price of other products has been gradually closing up, though the recent depression in cotton has somewhat enlarged it.
Agriculture had on the whole been going higher while industry had been growing lower.
Industrial and commercial activities, being carried on for the most part by corporations, are taxed at a much higher rate than farming, which is carried on by individuals.
This will inevitably make industrial commodity costs high while war taxation lasts.
It is because of this circumstance that national tax reduction has a very large indirect benefit upon the farmer, though it can not relieve him from the very great burden of the local taxes which he pays directly.
We have practically relieved the farmer of any Federal income tax.
There is agreement on all sides that some portions of our agricultural industry have lagged behind other industries in recovery from the war and that further improvement in methods of marketing of agricultural products is most desirable.
There is belief also that the Federal Government can further contribute to these ends beyond the many helpful measures taken during the last five years through the different acts of Congress for advancing the interests of the farmers.
The packers and stockyards act, Establishing of the intermediate credit banks for agricultural purposes, The Purnell Act for agricultural research, The Capper-Volstead Cooperative Marketing Act, The cooperative marketing act of 1926, Amendments to the warehousing act, The enlargement of the activities of the Department of Agriculture, Enlargement of the scope of loans by the Farm Loan Board, The tariff on agricultural products, The large Federal expenditure in improvement of waterways and highways, The reduction of Federal taxes, in all comprise a great series of governmental actions in the advancement of the special interest of agriculture.
