HE department has had a productive year in work performed.
After four years of effort in consolidating and coordinating activities, reducing the personnel to a point more nearly commensurate with the needs of the service, and discontinuing unnecessary activities, the department has become a more compact, efficient organization than theretofore.
During this period of reconstruction many off shoots of bureaucratic control have been abandoned.
These were characterized by the magnified importance of 'nonessential activities and in cumbersome methods of transacting the legitimate work of the department.
The accomplishments in these directions are represented in dollars and cents by the saving of $131,331,871.61 in operation expenditures for the four years, but further by the reduction in force of 2,722 permanent employees and an increased output in the specific functions delegated to the department by law.
The remaining employees have responded to the impetus of properly directed activity, and progressive changes in methods have revived an interest in the department's work, both internally and in the public mind.
Criticism by those affected of some of the methods instituted has not been absent, but the effort to serve the public in a businesslike way and with the least drain possible on the taxpayers has been justified by time.
The improvement in service still continues, and the past year may be credited withnoteworthy accomplishments.
The General Land Office collected over $9,000,000, four times the cost of its maintenance.
In the Washington office a net reduction of 22 employees was accomplished.
15 clerks and 13 registers.
The position of disbursing agent for the inspection service was abolished and the work transferred to the disbursing agent for the surveying service.
The southern inspection division was abolished and the work transferred to Washington.
Over 45,000 filings were made in the district land offices, involving over 3,500,000 acres.
The surveying service accomplished the original survey of nearly 4,000,000 acres.
As a result of investigations by inspectors over 190,000 acres were restored to the public domain.
Patents to the number of 22,000 were issued, conveying title to nearly 4,500,000 acres, and approximately 5,000 permits to prospect for oil, coal, potash, etc., were granted.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs effected a complete reorganization of the medical service during the year.
Assignment of two institutions, formerly boarding-school plants at Fort Defiance, Ariz., and Tohatchi, N. Mex., with a combined capacity of 650 patients, will afford opportunity for the successful treatment of trachoma prevailing among the Indians of the Southwest.
Other results of the year are exemplified by establishing working relations between the district medical directors and the State and local health authorities, by increases in hospital capacities in several jurisdictions, and by improvement and increase of the nursing service.
The adoption of the platoon system of school organization and its preliminary introduction in eight Indian boarding schools, to be followed, as resources permit, by its application to all Indian boarding schools, will result in the permanent improvement of the educational service.
The fiscal year witnessed the completed introduction of the budget system of distribution to the field units of the amounts of money allotted for the year to each Indian school and agency for all current yearly expenditures.
The Bureau of Pensions in the last fiscal year adjudicated 160,756 pension claims, an increase of 21,405 over the previous year, this in the face of a net reduction of 55 in the number of employees by allowing vacancies to lapse; the enrollment and payment to approximately 60,000 pensioners of the automatic increases provided by acts of Congress and the readjudication of the cases of the 12,524 annuitants on the roll to give them the benefits of the provisions of the new civil service retirement law of July 3, 1926.
With steady progress in the routine tasks of the Geological Survey, certain accomplishments stand out.
A promising start was made in the cooperative studies of potash deposits by the Departments of the Interior and of Commerce, in which the Geological Survey chooses the sites for tests and analyzes the cores, and the Bureau of Mines of the Department of Commerce handles the drilling operations.
The revision of the Leadville, Colo., monograph was published, and is believed to be as notable a contribution to the mining industry as was the original treatise 40 years ago.
The first colored geologic map of the State of Oklahoma ever published was issued during the year, and is of great value in the development of the petroleum and other mineral resources of that State, as well as for educational purposes.
There was considerable progress in the development of aerial photography in connection with topographic mapping.
In Alaska two large and hitherto unexplored areas were studied and mapped, and progress toward a map was made in the compilation of aerial photographs of southeastern Alaska taken earlier by the Navy Department.
There was advance in the development of more precise instruments for the study of quantities of water that are annually contributed to underground reservoirs and are available for public use.
In the conservation work, supervision under the mineral leasing laws was increased by the issue of 4,843 new leases, permits, and licenses—about 20 per cent increase during the year and a greater increase than that of the previous year.
The production of coal from leases on public lands increased 25 per cent or more than 2,500,000 tons.
Four "surveys"at the request of educational officers have brought to the Bureau of Education opportunity for outstanding achievement in the past year.
The system of education of Utah was subjected to an exhaustive examination under the direction of the Commissioner of Education and a series of constructive recommendations was submitted in October to the State officers.
Rutgers University, New Jersey, was similarly examined, and many of the suggestions which resulted have already been adopted.
A survey of 78 negro colleges and universities throughout the United States is well under way; the necessary field work is almost completed and a report is in preparation.
A study of the 69 land-grant colleges, to be directed by the Bureau of Education, was authorized by the Congress during the past session, and preparations for it have been begun.
It will be the most extensive work of the kind that has been undertaken by the Bureau of Education.
The Bureau of Reclamation under the 10-year program of construction adopted by the department, has been engaged in construction work of a magnitude equal to that of any period in its history.
Dams completed during the year include the American Falls Dam in Idaho, the McKay Dam on the Umatilla project, Oregon, and the Guernsey Dam on the North Platte project, Nebraska-Wyoming.
Preliminary work has been done on one new reservoir, work was begun on two new dams, and construction was continued on three projects.
Even more attention was given to the human problems on the projects.
All prospective settlers on public land were selected on the basis of approved qualifications of industry, experience, character, and capital.
A beginning in affording settlers expert advice and direction in their agricultural programs was made by the appointment of a reclamation economist on the Belle Fourche project.
Soil surveys have been made and land has been classified on the basis of its potential productivity.
The reawakening of interest in opportunities for irrigated farm homes is indicated by the fact that 283 settlers filed on public land farm units opened to entry, including 122 units on the North Platte project opened to entry a few days after the close of the fiscal year.
A number of transfers of farms were also arranged for settlers who had been attempting unsuccessfully to farm land incapable of supporting a family.
Twentythree farms in private ownership on which the bureau held options for their sale at reasonable prices and on long time were also sold to new settlers.
The National Park Service during the year rendered service to 2,797,840 visitors to national parks and monuments, an increase of 482,935 over 1926.
The educational opportunities in the national parks were advanced.
Facilities for study were increased through archeological, geological, paleontological, and other scientific investigations and explorations carried on during the year with the cooperation of national educational and scientific organizations.
An area of approximately 7 square miles in an outlying section of Yosemite National Park was set aside as a perpetual wild-life preserve, to be protected against trespass and maintained in à natural state for scientific study in the future.
Future road and trail needs in the parks were studied and a new road program developed.
Increased activity in road construction was carried on during the year under available appropriations.
Under the road budget 145 miles of highway have been completed and 196 miles of road are now under construction.
Revenues received from the parks and monuments amounted to $703,849.60.
The Territory of Hawaii enjoyed consistent prosperity during the year.
The estimated population statistics show a steady increase of American citizens and a relatively rapid decrease of aliens.
The death rate is reported to be the lowest of record.
Infant mortality and deaths from tuberculosis were reduced.
Leprosy is steadily coming under control.
Prosperity is registered in larger commercial and savings bank deposits.
Taxable property shows marked increases in yalue.
The International Pan Pacific Conference on Education, Rehabilitation, Reclamation, and Recreation, held in the month of April, called by the President under authority of an act of Congress and presided over by the Secretary of the Interior, brought before the nations of the Pacific the strategic value of Hawaii as a conference point, with the most interesting and human laboratory for those engaged in promoting the arts of peace.
The development of the Territory of Alaska on the whole appears to be slowly but no less surely advancing.
Improvement in industrial conditions noted during the preceding year continued and was apparent in renewed activities in many industries throughout the Territory.
Conditions affecting labor continued to be very satisfactory and wage schedules were well stabilized and satisfactorily adjusted to living costs.
Customs reports show a notable increase in the value of imports and exports, the increase in the latter being accounted for by the unusually large catch of salmon which was the greatest in the history of the Territory.
Health conditions were generally good, although several epidemics of contagious diseases were reported from isolated communities in the Yukon and Kuskokwim districts.
Advancement was made during the past year in furthering the policy of maintaining the Alaska Railroad as a satisfactory means of transportation.
Wooden bridges are being replaced by steel structures, trestles filled in, cuts and fills widened, and the roadbed improved.
Two large locomotives, which do the work of four smaller ones, were added to the equipment.
Rapid progress was made in changing the Moose Creek branch line from narrow to standard gauge.
An increased amount of business was handled at but little increase in costs.
3.9 per cent, despite additional costs for maintaining snow-fighting equipment and forces over a longer period than in the previous year.
St. Elizabeths Hospital during the year treated over 300 paretics with malaria and gratifying results were secured.
The establishment of a clinic in dermatology; the extension of the social service department and the training of students in that subject; increased instruction to nurses, not only in psychiatry but in social problems; the increased use of the hospital for a training center in psychiatry by the general hospitals of the city; the extension of facilities for hydrotherapy; and research work in the cause and treatment of encephalitis, so-called "eeping sickness"are worthy of special mention.
Howard University last year completed a new $500,000 laboratory building for the preclinical branch of medicine, and raised the $500,000 of endowments for instruction in the school of medicine.
It has undertaken a comprehensive survey of medical instruction under the direction of Fred C. Zapffee, secretary of the Association of American Medical Colleges, looking toward fundamental improvement of preclinical laboratory work and the most effective use of the rich clinical materials available at Freedmen's Hospital.
Admissions to the nine colleges and schools of the university are henceforth all to be centralized in the office of the university registrar.
The patients receiving care and treatment at Freedmen's Hospital numbered 24,653 for the year, exceeding all previous records.
Surgical operations in 2,579 cases were performed, representing an increase of 21 per cent over the preceding year.
The hospital accommodated 1,087 pay patients, an increase of 117 over the previous year.
A fully equipped dental department was established during the year, with a registered dentist in charge.
Bedside instruction and training in surgical procedure were given to 115 students of Howard University Medical College, 25 young medical graduates were trained as internes, and 70 pupil nurses were receiving a full course of instruction.
After four years of intensive economy and progressive reductions in appropriations and expenditures, it becomes more difficult each year to report savings.
The successive reductions in appropriations, including deficiency items, for the department for 1924, 1925, and 1926 over each preceding fiscal year totaled $60,279,424.78 exclusive of reductions in 1925 by the transfer of the Patent Office and Bureau of Mines to another executive department.
The unexpended balances turned back to the Treasury from appropriations by Congress for the same period amounted to $43,343,037.86, making an aggregate saving in operation costs for three years of $103,622,462.64.
The funds appropriated for the fiscal year 1927, including deficiencies, totaled $253,252,318, or $25,644,893.31 less than for the preceding fiscal year.
The unexpended balances for 1927 are estimated at $2,064,515.66, making a total saving of $27,709,408.97 for the fiscal year 1927.
This brings the aggregate savings in expenditures to $131,331,871.61 for the past four years, during which present administrative methods have been in operation.
The Department of the Interior carries certain overhead or fixed charges not susceptible of reduction by the operative management.
This means that whatever economies in expenditures are planned or effected in the operation of the department must be limited to a small portion of the total appropriations.
These "fixed charges" for 1927 were represented by Army and Navy pensions of $192,000,000, exclusive of additional funds for increasing pensions advanced from 1928 appropriations, and the permanent and indefinite appropriations, which included such items as $3,000,000 for payments to States from receipts under the mineral leasing act, $19, 696,900 of Indian moneys, and $2,550,000 for Federal contributions to State colleges for agriculture and the mechanic arts.
These appropriations, over which the department had no control, except as trustee or disbursing agent, amounted to $217,638,900, or 85.93 per cent of the total appropriation for 1927.
This left a working balance of only $35,613,418, for the regular operation of the department, as compared to $43,085,753.81 for the 1926 fiscal year, or a decrease of $7,472,335.81.
This is a saving of 17.34 per cent of the 1926 available appropriation for the general conduct of the department.
Adding to it the estimated unexpended balance of $2,064,- 515.66, and the reductions of $18,172,557.50 for pensions and permanent and indefinite items, brings the total savings for 1927 over 1926 to $27,709,408.97, as mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
Receipts of the department from all sources amounted to $46,030,- 331.52 for the fiscal year 1927, as compared with $49,703,539.93 for the previous year, a decrease of $3,673,208.41.
A considerable proportion of the reductions in expenditures recounted in the preceding section of this report was accomplished through economies in operation methods effected in all branches of the service.
Perhaps the most outstanding improvement was the removal of the Bureau of Pensions to the Interior Building, which now houses all the major activities of the department.
The moving commenced in June and was completed in September.
The Pension Office occupied 111,219 square feet of space in the Pension Building, and by a contraction of their requirements 94,079 square feet of space was provided for the 750 employees and the furniture and files of the bureau in the Interior Building.
The move was made possible by a gradual reduction during the preceding three years of the space requirements of all Interior activities and the removal of offices not under the jurisdiction of the department but formerly occupying space in the Interior Building to quarters elsewhere, which were made available by the relinquishment of the Pension Building.
For a number of years certain bureaus and divisions of the department, as well as outside activities located in the building, had been expanding and locating at any point found vacant, causing an undesirable situation in the proper administration of business.
In making room for the Bureau of Pensions these scattered elements were to a large extent unified, which has also effected a considerable annual saving.
The policies of the department have a closer relational bearing on pension work since the change, and immediate savings were effected by combining the supply, forms, addressograph, and other divisions of the Pension Office with similar centralized activities in the department.
For the past 14 years the Office of the Secretary maintained storage space for permanent records in the Patent Office Building.
In line with the department's effort to house all Interior activities under one roof, these records were removed to the Interior Building during the summer of 1927.
The personnel of any organization affects fundamentally the success or failure of the enterprise.
Especially is this true in an organization such as the Department of the Interior, which was formed primarily to render public service, with more than 11,000 permanent employees scattered through 40 States and Territories.
To these employees is due much of the credit for economies in operation resulting in the savings reported for the department.
The centralized system of appointment work established within the last two years becomes increasingly satisfactory.
The personnel records for all units of the department are now maintained in the division of appointments, office of the Secretary, which handled 7,500 status changes of employees during the year just closed.
Irregularities in procedure existing under the old method of appointment in the separate bureaus and offices have been corrected, practices have improved, and uniform procedure has been established throughout the service.
During the year a pamphlet of regulations governing appointments : in the field services of the department was compiled and published, and its distribution to the field officers will further assist in bringing about uniform practices in handling personnel.
This is the first publication of its kind to be issued by the department.
The leave regulations for the department were revised during the year and inequalities that prevailed under the former regulations were adjusted.
At the close of the fiscal year 1926, there were 11,764 permanent employees in the department, and at the close of the fiscal year 1927 there were 11,525 permanent employees on the rolls, a net reduction of 239.
This represents a reduction of 2,722 employees, or 19.11 per cent, during the past four years, exclusive of the reduction in force by the transfer of the Patent Office and Bureau of Mines in the calendar year 1925.
There was a monthly average of temporary employees on duty in Washington and the field of 2,691, as compared with 2,598 for the previous year.
The turnover for the permanent force of the department was 55 per cent, as against 46 per cent for last year.
For Washington it was 15 per cent, or 3 per cent less than for the previous year; but for the permanent field force, the turnover increased from 59 per cent for 1926 to 74 per cent for 1927, a gain of 15 per cent.
This increase in field turnover may be largely accounted for by the efforts of the Indian Office, which maintains by far the largest field force of any unit in the department, to replace temporary employees with permanents.
In previous years, temporary employees in regularly established positions were not displaced promptly.
Salaries and living conditions in the Indian field service are not attractive, as discussed elsewhere in my report, and the result has been a turnover of 67.4 per cent for that service alone.
The turnover for the Alaska Railroad, due to conditions in Alaska and railroad employment generally, was 201.6 per cent, which was a factor in the relatively high average turnover for the field service as a whole.
Appropriations and allotments for salaries for the fiscal year 1927 were $18,820,477.45; the amount spent was.
17,371,699.84, making a net saving of $1,448,777.61, or 7.6 per cent of the appropriations and allotments for salaries.
Since the reclassification of Government employees, the Department has not asked Congress for an increase in appropriations to cover salary increases to employees, and yet a considerable sum has been distributed to deserving employees each year.
Employees of the department benefited by reclassification three years ago in salary increases of about $1,850,000 over and above the bonus.
In addition, many thousands of dollars have been added to their salaries by reallocation of grades over those established when reclassification became effective.
The amount spent fór promotions on an annual basis was $118,790 for 1925, for 1926 it was $85,940, and for the fiscal year just closed $116,168.
These promotions were based on efficiency records of employees and funds were available from lapsed salaries resulting from leave without pay, resignations, deaths, retirements, and otherreductionsin force without direct appropriation by Congress.
The regulations for reduction of force, requiring the preparation of separation ratings as distinct from efficiency ratings, have proven to be cumbersome and unsatisfactory.
Designed apparently to protect the older employees and those having military preference by adding to their efficiency ratings arbitrary credits for longevity or military service, the effect of the system is actually to nullify the efficiency ratings and restrict the discretion of administrative officers beyond the point of practicability.
The procedure involved in compiling service records for all employees in the group affected imposes a labor out of proportion to the results obtained.
The delay in securing the employees' personal history from the separate departments in which they have been employed, as a basis for the service credits, increases the expense to the Government and sometimes destroys the effectiveness of the proposed reduction in force by prolonging the process.
The separation ratings, after they have finally been applied, frequently bring injustice to the conscientious employees who are actually doing the best work of the Government.
Separation lists prepared in the Department of the Interior, based on these credits, have indicated that the system often results in dropping efficient employees whose length of service was only a few years below others with less satisfactory records.
In some instances, when the service credit was added, employees with relatively low efficiency ratings acquired a separation rating of more than 100 per cent, which placed them out of reach, when they were actually entitled to less consideration from the standpoint of service rendered than others in the grade.
The effect has been to separate from service employees more productive than some retained.
If the system is continued, maximum credit for longevity and military service should be reduced to a point where the efficient employee may compete with the inefficient.
Tenure of office should depend primarily on efficiency.
Military service should be recognized and the older efficient employees should receive a fair measure of credit for the years they have devoted to the service of the Government, but the importance of service credits should not be so magnified as to encourage mediocrity.
There is a need indicated for a change in the civil service retirement law to permit retirement, optional with the Government or with the employee, after 30 years'service and at an attained age of 60 years.
Remedial legislation of this character would be economic from the Government's standpoint through the replacement of employees whose efficiency, because of advancing years, is declining.
Many employees, after 30 or more years of service, find their health impaired by the time they reach 60, to the extent, at least, where in justice to themselves as well as to the Government they should retire from active service.
Yet their condition may be such that they could not establish a claim for total disability within the meaning of the retirement law.
It ought to be possible for them to retire from service before their health becomes irreparably injured.
The problem of some employees retiring at 70 years is to find means to supplement their annuity to meet the burden of financial obligations which may not have diminished in proportion to the decrease in earning capacity.
Opportunities of securing private employment are less at 70 than at 60, and it is possible that many who find existence difficult on the small annuity provided could at 60 establish themselves in new fields where they might add to their income.
The Indian Service has not kept pace with the progress elsewhere along health, educational, industrial, and social lines.
The appropriations for general purposes for the fiscal year 1923 were $10,316,- 221.30, and in the five fiscal years since they have been increased by about $2,338,463.70, principally for medical and health activities.
But the cumulative effect of many years of financial neglect has demanded even larger appropriations, if the Government may perform its full duty to the American Indian.
Underrating the requirements of the Indian Service has continued so long that it has become a habit difficult to correct.
The direction of Indian affairs to-day affects the education, health, morals, and religion of approximately 350,000 people, all of them recently made citizens of the United States.
There are 193 Indian tribes, speaking 58 languages; 200 reservations, widely separated in 26 different States and occupying a territory as large as New England and New York combined; 106 superintendents in charge of reservations; 202 Indian schools, with 700 teachers; and 96 hospitals, with 178 physicians and 146 nurses.
The efficiency of an organization depends on the rank and file of its personnel.
Supervision may be competent, but the struggle with untrained, incompetent, or dissatisfied help, especially when far removed from final administrative authority, is discouraging.
With a more stable field force, the officers of the Indian Service could devote more attention to constructive work and less to training new employees and doing the work of the inefficient.
Authority could then be decentralized by transferring more of the administrative responsibility from Washington to the field, where it belongs.
The Assistant Secretary of the Interior in Washington, having supervision over the Bureau of Indian Affairs, for example, was required to take 18,000 administrative actions on Indian cases last year, in addition to many thousands receiving final action in the Indian Bureau.
Much of this work should have been handled in the field offices.
That the situation has not been entirely hopeless is due to a great extent to competent supervision and to the innate missionary spirit of many of the employees.
Advancement among the Indians has been accomplished despite the financial handicap, but the missionary spirit largely depended upon to hold underpaid employees in the Indian Service years ago is not now adequate in itself.
The greater opportunities for remunerative employment in all lines which have developed during the past decade have made it more difficult each year to find capable young people willing to sacrifice their most productive years to a service that offers a restricted social life and little opportunity for a successful career.
The turnover of physicians in the Indian field service for the fiscal year 1927 was 56 per cent; for nurses, 122 per cent; for teachers, 48 per cent; while the average turnover for all permanent employees in the service was 67 per cent.
These figures can not be ignored.
They are a definite expression of the conditions underlying the socalled Indian problem and have their origin in shortage of funds.
The constant capitulation between necessities and means brings despair to those engaged in the work, because the necessities of the human element in the Indian Service should dominate.
The Indian medical and nursing services should be stabilized.
More and better hospitals are required throughout, but even if the hospital plants and equipment were in excellent condition, much of the effectiveness of the health work would be lost if the personnel continues to be subject to constant change.
Benefits will not accrue unless doctors and nurses have a tenure of office sufficiently long to permit them to become familiar with the medical and nursing problems peculiar to the Indians and bring about the application of professional fitness to them.
The frequent turnover of personnel in the medical and nursing services has been due to low salaries, poor living conditions, isolation, and long hours of labor.
Four years ago the entrance pay for agency and school physicians was $1,200, which has since been increased to $2,400 gross and $2,100 net after deducting allowances for quarters, heat, and light.
This salary is still lower than in other branches of the Government engaged in health work, and promotions are slower than in the other services.
The entrance pay for trained nurses is $1,680 gross, with $1,500 net after deducting the allowances mentioned.
Other Federal services pay $1,680 gross for staff nurses, $1,860 for head nurses, and $2,100 for chief nurses.
All the positions in the Indian Service, except one of head nurse, are in the lowest grade, thus affording practically no chance for advancement.
Quarters in the Indian medical service vary from a comfortable cottage fairly well furnished, to one room without reasonable facilities for bath and toilet.
Frequently these quarters are inadequate for a physician with a family, and at some places even for a physician without family.
At one station the physician lives in a three-room adobe house without conveniences and with the necessity of conveying water for domestic purposes a distance of 2 miles.
Quarters in other medical branches of the Government are comfortable and adequate by comparison, with modern bath and toilet facilities.
The quarters of nurses frequently comprise only a bedroom, with the necessity of sharing bath and toilęt facilities with other personnel.
In other Federal services, nurses are usually given comfortable living quarters, frequently with sitting-room facilities, modern furniture, sanitary bath and toilet facilities for a group of two or three nurses, if not private bath for individual quarters.
A modern tiled bathroom with sanitary plumbing in the Indian Service is the exception rather than the rule.
The activities of the Indian medical service are usually located at points remote from centers of population, where there is no opportunity for the physician and nurse to associate with members of their own profession.
As they can not attend meetings of medical or nursing character, their contacts with others of their kind are infrequent or do not occur at all.
They are also precluded from joining in any agency sociability because of the demands of their work, and other recreational opportunities are limited.
The Indian Service is understaffed with physicians and nurses as well as other personnel.
A physician attached to an Indian Service hospital, as a rule, also has a reservation practice to carry out.
The distances required in travel over unimproved roads and in all conditions of weather run up to many miles.
The duties are arduous and call for whole-time service day or night.
There are 66 hospitals in the Indian field service having only one graduate nurse each.
She is responsible for all the hospital work, except medical, and for that also to a considerable extent when the doctor is absent on reservation work.
She serves full duty during the daylight hours and is subject to call at any hour of the night.
Even in the hospitals where two or three nurses are on duty the demands are so great that they have no regular hours off duty.
In other Federal services there are definite hours of duty, upon the completion of which the physician and the nurse, except in emergency, have a definite period during which no calls are made upon them for professional services.
These hours can be spent in rest, recreation, social activities, or used for professional advancement.
It will be seen from the foregoing that the Indian medical service suffers in competition with other medical branches of the Government.
Competent physicians and nurses who accept employment with the Indian field service are inclined to move along to some other service at the first opportunity.
To correct these conditions increased funds will be required.
It will be necessary to modernize existing quarters and to construct additional quarters where they are' now lacking.
It will also be necessary to employ additional physicians and nurses.
If we are to recruit competent and well-trained professional people for these positions we must be able to compete in the market with others hiring personnel of this type.
We must give them spheres of activity which will not make greater demands than other Federal services and out of proportion to their ability to respond.
Promotions should be made regularly upon demonstration of professional fitness and sufficient length of service.
These conditions are being corrected as rapidly as means will permit.
Isolation is inherent in many stations, and to offset its undesirable features more attention must be given to the physical comfort of personnel.
The employees must be offered attractive housing conditions and such opportunities for recreation and entertainment as can be had in isolated localities.
At the present time we are not attracting the younger, more vigorous, and better type of physician or nurse.
The Indian school service likewise suffers by comparison.
Highschool instruction all over the United States costs more than elementary instruction, and yet Indian schools offering high-school courses often do not have as much money as lower-grade schools.
Appropriations for the maintenance and operation of Indian schools have permitted an annual expenditure of not more than $225 per student, which includes lodging, clothing, subsistence, and academic and vocational instruction, and such overhead charges as administration, power, fuel, and various other expenses.
If the amount of this allotment per pupil does not speak for itself, comparison might be made with the cost of maintenance of other schools of similar character which afford industrial training, keeping in mind that the Indian boarding schools undertake to provide clothing for their pupils.
It has not been possible on this budget to secure a sufficient number of necessary employees or obtain for the salaries offered those who possess the essential qualifications to operate efficiently.
This is especially true in the case of vocational instruction.
Teachers of trade subjects, agriculture, and home economics as a rule have been such in name only, possessing neither education nor attainments fitting them to impart knowledge to classes of Indian students.
Much of this personnel has been of the character of manual or mechanical labor to handle the mass of institutional work to be done each day, but which is actually performed under their supervision and instruction by details of Indian children to an extent detrimental to the pursuit of their studies.
It has been desired to introduce the platoon ·system of school organization, the three-quarters day of class instruction, one-quarter day of institutional detail (work) representing time divisions of the scholastic day, and to keep the children of the three lower primary grades in the classroom all day.
To carry into effect these measures for securing a more rapid progress of the pupils and to reach a higher standard of instruction necessitates employment of "auditorium teachers" and "instructors of shop subjects."
For the auditorium teachers, who must be well versed in a variety of subjects, it was proposed to pay salaries of $1,440 for junior high and $1,560 for senior high teachers.
The specified requirements, which were deemed barely sufficient to insure that the incumbent could give the instruction required, were submitted to the Civil Service Commission, but no examinations were held, as the commission believed it futile to expect eligibles to qualify at the salaries offered.
The situation was much the same for instructors of shop subjects, but the proposed requirements were reduced in grade so that an examination might be held.
Many of the school plants were erected for other purposes and have been adapted to school use.
They are, with few exceptions, in a dilapidated condition from hard usage over a period of years without proper repairs.
Sanitary conditions are not of the best, and generally their standard is not equal to other Government institutions.
There has occurred a loss to the Government by reason of neglect of the mechanical plants by employees not having the requisite degree of training or ability, and instances of this have been frequent in connection with heating, power, lighting, and plumbing systems, which have suffered deterioration through improper operation and repairing or through waste of fuel and water.
The industrial program of the Indian Service was designed to encourage self-support instead of mendicancy, and upon its success ultimately depends a reduction in the Government's expenditures for maintaining the Indians.
The purpose of making allotments was to supplant tribal relations with individual responsibility for self-support.
As soon as an Indian was given an allotment he was urged to establish a home.
With a few saddle ponies and a piece of land held under trust patent which prevented him from borrowing on it, the average Indian was confronted with a problem if he expected to support himself and family.
The Government's experience in reclaination for white farmers has demonstrated .
Yet the Indian, untrained in agricultural pursuits and lacking individual capital, was placed upon raw land and expected to acquire independence.
Instead of starting in a direct line to promote selfsupport by assisting them to build homes, purchasing farm equipment, and providing instruction along agricultural lines, the practice of issuing rations and making per capita payments was continud by the Government.
Consequently, the Indian could see no necessity for individual effort and became a pensioner looking to the Government for a living.
Within recent years the Government has been appropriating for the purpose of assisting Indians to obtain farm implements, livestock and seeds, to equip them to make use of their allotments.
If an Indian has sufficient land and no capital to improve it, the Indian Office, under this plan, may make a small loan to purchase a few of the things necessary for the cultivation of his land.
The Indians are required to sign agreements providing for the repayment of the amount loaned within a specified time, and experience shows that they are making a remarkable record of repayment.
This "reimbursable fund" is used only in cases where the Indians have no other resources available.
This method of assisting the Indians tends to give them a definite measure of self respect and a recognition of the obligations to meet, their debts.
While thousands of Indian families have been placed on a self-supporting basis through the use of these funds, the annual appropriation during the last few years has not exceeded $200,000, and each year this amount proves inadequate to meet the demands made upon it.
Last year only 6,000 Indians could be assisted with the $185,000 available, and to reach even this number only the necessities for cultivation, such as seeds, could be provided.
The law permits loans for as much as $600 on unirrigated land, but the average assistance last year was around $30, a sum so inconsiderable as to avail nothing toward agricultural development.
If a larger fund were available for this purpose not only a greater number of Indians could be aided toward self-support, but more complete assistance could be given individuals than has been possible with the inadequate sum available.
White communities in territory adjacent to reservations where our Indian families live, employ trained workers called county agents, who visit and advise white farmers in agriculture, stock raising, and home economics.
These agents are trained in agricultural colleges and universities for their special line of work.
The salaries paid them run from $2,250 to $3,000, with provision for an adequate expense account.
Our Indian Service farmers receive a salary of from $1,200 to $1,500 annually, and they have a more difficult problem in instructing the Indians than the county agent, who deals with white people having a more advanced basis of agricultural experience to start with.
The county agent lives in a community of white people, with splendid school facilities for his children, and his salary is sufficient to provide him with first-class living quarters.
The Indian Service farmer lives in an isolated region usually not within reach of good schools.
Due to low appropriations for repairs and upkeep of buildings throughout the service, the quarters at farm stations are generally in a state of disrepair and lacking in conveniences.
The Indian Service farmer is compelled to travel great distances over roads which are in the main unimproved.
The restricted amounts available for the purchase of automobiles, ofter makes it necessary for him to run a machine five or six years old, and it not infrequently happens that the machine is out of commission for two or three weeks.
In some instances we are unable to furnish Government cars, and employees out of their small salaries are providing their own private cars without remuneration from the Government except for gas and oil.
The class of farmer we are able to obtain for the salaries paid, and the conditions under which he must work, are not comparable with the county agents so common in rural communities to-day.
One of the needs of the Service is to employ on the average reservation at least one man of county agent caliber, and on the larger reservations, two such men, in addition to the practical farmers now employed.
The conditions described reveal some of the obstacles against which officers of the department have had to struggle in their endeavor to properly care for the Indians.
They are not conditions which may be corrected in a day or a year, nor would unlimited appropriation of funds by Congress prove to be a facile remedy.
With the cooperation of the Budget and Congress, the department has progressed in Indian work during the last few years through increased appropriations and careful administration.
Only a wise financial policy and reasonable annual increases in appropriations will continue to build up the Indian Service.
I desire to renew my previous recommendations to Congress concerning State responsibility for the education, health, and social welfare of the Indians.
State boards of health, departments of education and agriculture, and boards of charity and welfare are available in many States having Indian population to handle much of the work now performed by the Federal Government.
This method would tend to make the Indians a part of the body politic, rather than encourage the isolation which now characterizes the Government's method of Indian administration.
Interest has already been manifested by some of the States and bills were introduced in the last session of Congress with this end in view.
It would be feasible for Congress to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to enter into contracts with the States for the handling of the health and education of the Indians, the Federal expenditures being made through the States under proper safeguards.
It is apparent to those familiar with reclamation projects that the economic condition of water users is better and their relations to the Government are more cordial than they were prior to the passage of the adjustment and amending acts of 1924 and 1925.
This has been accompanied by a higher percentage of payments due the Government, particularly on projects or divisions of projects turned over to irrigators to manage and maintain.
Investing them with this authority and responsibility has improved morale and increased local pride.
The irrigation works cease to be a Government concern.
They are now a local possession.
Decentralization has been accomplished so quietly that few realize its significance.
Contracts have been executed by 30 irrigation districts and water users' associations on 16 projects, for the transfer to local control of the care and operation of the irrigation works of these projects or divisions of projects.
Under these transfers, water users have to raise in advance the money required to operate and maintain the works, which was formerly appropriated from the reclamation fund to be repaid at the end of the year, or later.
Often it was much later or not at all.
Lessened risk of loss to the Government by having water users advance the money is shown by the fact that the appropriation for operation and maintenance for 1928 was $1,105,000 less than in 1927, and that of 1929 will be less than in 1928.
Although the yearly construction payments falling due were reduced by contracts extending the payment period, the total payments for 1927 were $2,086,314.28.
Better collections made the construction income for the fiscal year 1926 the largest in reclamation history.
The agricultural development now under way on nearly all projects is bringing increasęd construction revenue.
Had it not been for a delayed payment on one project, which will be credited to next year's receipts, the income for 1927 would have considerably exceeded that of 1926.
The Reclamation Bureau is now constructing a number of works which in size, cost, and natural obstacles rank among the great irrigation enterprises of the world.
The dam on the Owyhee project in Idaho will be higher than any existing structure.
The recently completed McKay Dam has an international interest because of its original design.
These works are a part of the 10-year program aimed to complete construction on all approved projects.
The estimated cost of these developments is $97,000,000, and to complete them in 10 years will involve a yearly expenditure of between $9,000,- 000 and $10,000,000.
The policy of the department is to build all important works by contract.
The success of this and the relations with contractors depend on the engineering experience and ability of those who prepare plans and specifications and the care and thoroughness of preparatory investigations and estimates.
The engineering experience of the Federal Reclamation Bureau is shown by the close agreement between estimated costs and final costs of canals constructed during the past two years, and in building large dams within estimates.
The uncertain conditions of submerged foundations and control of streams add to the hazards of both-estimates and construction, but the close agreement between the estimated cost and the actual construction cost of the four dams last completed, constitutes an accomplishment in planning and construction worthy of mention.
Of the four dams completed by the bureau during the fiscal year, Black Canyon had been estimated to cost $1,800,000, whereas the actual cost was $1,492,304.80; Guernsey Dam was estimated to cost $1,780- 000 and actually cost $1,700,351.05; McKay Dam was estimated at $2,452,000 and actually cost $1,920,349.64; and American Falls, estimated to cost $3,090,000, was built for $2,879,007.76.
All power plants on reclamation projects were installed to cheapen construction or operation of irrigation works.
The cheapest means of excavating canals, for example, is by dragline machines, operated by electricity.
But the social benefits after settlement have been almost as great as the money savings during construction.
This local power supply has been valuable to settlers in giving them cheap light for their houses and cheap power to operate small farm machinery.
Some of the most valuable features of reclamation, like the Guernsey Dam, would have been too large a burden for irrigators to bear, and could not have been built if part of the cost could not be paid by power.
Utilizing the opportunities for.power on reclamation projects has been, therefore, a marked social and economic success.
Excluding the power system on the Salt River project, in Arizona, the bureau has invested $2,600,000 in the construction of power plants on 11 irrigation projects.
The cost of operating these plants during the fiscal year 1927 was $146,181.62, and gross revenue from the sale of commercial power was $426,818.96.
The first cost of power development on the Salt River project was $557,560.
This has been increased by the water users operating the project, to a total investment of $3,469,706.83.
The cost of the operation of these plants during the fiscal year 1927 was $173,485.33, and gross power sales totaled $1,237,452.60.
The profits derived from power operations on the Boise project in Idaho, the North Platte project in Nebraska-Wyoming, the Riverton project and the Shoshone project in Wyoming, will be reserved to return the bureau's investment; while the net profits from power operations on the Minidoka project in Idaho, the Newlands project in Nevada, the Strawberry Valley project in Utah, and the Yuma project in Arizona-California are being credited to the projects.
It is helping to lighten the burden of water charges as well as making conditions better for settlers on these projects.
The generation and sale of electric energy alone is not a proper function of the Department of the Interior, but is warranted only where its possibilities have been incidentally provided and where it may become a means of reimbursement.
The transfer to private management of irrigation works built by the Government at an expense of millions of dollars and only partly paid for does not in any way lessen the responsibility of the Government for the proper maintenance of these works.
The need for continuous and careful supervision by the Government is emphasized by the fact that there will be strong temptation for local managers to reduce maintenance expenses at a loss in efficiency and safety with a certainty of large expenditures later on.
Provision has been made for such systematic supervision.
Irrigation works on unsettled, unimproved land are a liability.
There can be no income from water until the land is settled and the farms improved.
Settlement and solvency go together.
Not only must there be farmers, but they must be good farmers.
Intensive cultivation is required to meet the larger expenses of irrigated farming, closely associated with which is the need for prompt development of farms.
During the past year the problems of settlement and farm improvement have been considered at conferences held with officials of the colonization departments of railroads serving the projects, with State colonization organizations, chambers of commerce, and other agencies interested.
While there are certain weaknesses in our provisions for settlement, and serious obstacles yet to be overcome, progress in settlement during the past year has, on the whole, been gratifying.
On March 1, 1927, the bureau opened to entry 145 public-land farm units on the Tule Lake division of the Klamath project, Oregon-California.
The opening was advertised widely through the press and by the distribution of several thousand copies of a descriptive booklet, and the cooperation of the Oregon State Chamber of Commerce and the colonization department of the Southern Pacific Railroad was secured.
By the end of August all the 145 farms had been applied for by settlers who had the requisite qualifications of industry, experience, character, and capital, and 70 of the settlers were on the ground building homes, erecting fences, and carrying on their farm development.
Even more striking were the results on the Interstate, Fort Laramie, and Northport divisions of the North Platte project, where 122 publicland farm units were opened for entry a few days after the close of the fiscal year.
More than 250 applications for these farms were received at the local project office, and all but six of the applicants were regarded by the board of examiners to be fully qualified under the settlement regulations of the department.
This result came through extensive advertising of these farms by the Union Pacific and Burlington Railroads, and through a circular of the bureau, posted in 10,000 selected post offices in 18 States.
On the Willwood division of the Shoshone project, 54 public-land farm units were opened to entry on June 1.
A booklet descriptive of the division has been issued by the bureau, and the effort to acquaint settlers with this opportunity was participated in by the department of commerce and industry of the State of Wyoming, and the colonization department of the Burlington Railroad.
Of the 16 prospective settlers who first visited the project after this opening, 13 remained to take up farms.
It is expected that all these farms will be applied for before the beginning of the next irrigation season.
A booklet describing the farms of the Riverton project, Wyoming, has been issued and steps taken to secure the cooperation of the Chicago & North Western Railroad and the Utah-Idaho Sugar Co. in the development of agriculture on this project.
These encouraging results have all been obtained where public land was being settled, and where the land was a gift.
On those projects where the land is privately owned and has to be purchased, settlement and farm development have proceeded much more slowly, and the future outlook is less satisfactory.
Some progress has been made, however, on the Belle Fourche project, South Dakota, where settlement has been backward for several years.
Here the bureau was made sales agent for 95 farms in private ownership.
The selling prices of these farms were fixed by independent appraisal, and the time of payment was extended to 20 years.
Booklets were issued describing the project and giving prices of farms and improvements.
Sixteen farms have been sold and more would have been sold if there had been houses on the farms to shelter the settler's family.
On the Lower Yellowstone project, Montana-North Dakota options were given the Government on 77 farms, which are being sold under the same conditions as those at Belle Fourche.
The movement has had the wholehearted aid of the Great Northern and Northern Pacific Railroads, which offer reduced railroad fares to the project.
If some way could be devised to put habitable dwellings on these farms, so that the health and comfort of the settler's family could be assured, all these farms would soon be taken.
Settlers are needed to farm the privately-owned land on the Milk River project, Montana.
The Department of Agriculture and the State Agricultural College of Montana are making economic and soil surveys of this project.
Reliable information is being assembled to inform settlers as to the opportunities of that section.
On the Orland project, California, the landowners have made the bureau the selling agent of about 1,800 acres of land.
This land is unimproved and owned mostly by nonresidents.
The directors of the Orland Water Users'Association have underwritten the expense of preparing an illustrated booklet, now being distributed.
The prices of the farms have been fixed by an independent appraisal.
The terms of payment are the same as those on Belle Fourche and Lower Yellowstone.
An active settlement campaign on this project during the coming winter is planned, in which the cooperation of the Southern Pacific Railroad Co. and the State .
The great irrigation works now being built to water the fertile lands of the Owyhee, Vale, and Kittitas districts depend for their solvency on the prompt settlement of the land and the early improvement and equipment of the farms.
Much of the land in these projects is privately owned by people who have neither capital nor intention of becoming irrigators when water is available.
They expect to sell, and what will happen when water is available largely depends on their ability to sell.
It is a situation which might have led to an orgy of speculation and inflation of land prices, which, however, has been prevented by a requirement that the land shall be sold at an appraised value.
If sold at a higher price, one-half of the increase will be applied to a payment on the water right.
The wisdom of this inhibition against speculation has been amply demonstrated during the past year, and it raises a question whether legislation should not go farther and require a guarantee of farm improvement from owners of private lands, before the construction of Government works on future projects begins.
These economic and financial aspects of irrigation are assuming greater and greater importance because the future development of the irrigation resources of the West seems to depend on Federal reclamation.
Irrigators are unable to pay the 'costs of private development, which include the discounts or flotation expenses in the sale of bonds, high interest charges, as well as the actual construction costs.
Distressed settlers on more than a score of partly completed private projects have appealed to this department to take over their enterprises and complete the development with reclamation funds.
At present this can not be considered, since all Government reclamation funds are needed to finish works partly built, but under these works, as well as works to be carried out in the future, there is need of methods and practices which will more effectively attract worthy, competent farmers, create conditions which will insure the health and comfort of their families, and provide incomes needed to create a comfortable living and pay irrigation charges.
The development, regulation, and control of the Colorado has been the subject of investigation by engineers and other experts of this department for many years.
Possible sites for dams have been spotted, water measurements made, and a large amount of other data gathered.
The interest of the Federal Government is based primarily on the fact that the stream is not only interstate but international, that several Federal reclamation projects have been constructed and secure their water from this stream, and the fact that the development involves flood control, irrigation, power development, and domestic water to & very large area.
Of perhaps primary importance is the protection from floods of Imperial Valley, Calif., and the Yuma reclamation project, Arizona, with their large investments and tremendous agricultural resources.
Incidentally, the same storage will provide water for irrigation of large areas of fertile arid lands and domestic water for southern California.
Engineers and economists have reached the conclusion that the receipts from irrigation, domestic water, and hydroelectric power developed at such a structure would, in a reasonable period of years, return the entire cost.
The primary development and sale of hydroelectric power by the Government is not consonant with the policy of the Department, but its subsidiary development at storage dams brings a direct reimbursement for Federal expenditures in constructing projects, and often supplies electricity for homes, agriculture, and municipalities not available from other sources.
As indicated, the problems are so numerous and varied that interstate and international compacts or treaties were deemed advisable.
While the matter was the subject of a bill which received long and careful consideration in Congress during the last session, such compacts have not been finally consummated.
In fact, at present writing contentions are made by some, which, if maintained, might leave the Federal Government without reason to expend further time and money in connection with the project.
If the rights and privileges incident to such project are purely local and intrastate, there would appear to be no warrant for the expenditure of Federal moneys for its construction.
If, however, as was the view when the departmental investigations and reports were made and the legislation proposed in Congress at its last session, the Federal Government has rights and interests, the whole matter should receive further consideration.
Therefore, during the past summer I secured the services of several eminent engineers and attorneys to make individual studies of the situation and individual reports to me, with the view of being thereby enabled to submit to you further information relative to this project and its problems.
These storage works being not only of interstate character but also vital to public interest in their phases of flood control, irrigation, and domestic water supply, and especially in the protection of our international water rights, I deem that the dam should be constructed with Federal aid and under Federal control.
Moreover, the Federal Government should in all prudence endeavor to recover the cost from the power potentialities and other revenues.
Lease of the rights to use the water to the highest bidders would be the simplest and best means of reimbursing the Federal Government for its outlay.
In March of last year I publicly invited proposals for such leases from those interested in the generation and distribution of hydroelectric power.
I have suggested that if it should prove that no adequate lease could be secured from parties willing to undertake generation and distribution, then the Government should have authority to erect the power plant and lease the plant itself, and I have considered that if no adequate contract of this character could be made, then the Government should have authority to generate and sell the power at the generating station to persons willing to purchase it and provide their own transmission and distribution.
Litigation and controversies affecting public land and Indian matters are becoming more complicated as competition for the remaining lands and resources increases.
This renders necessary an efficient legal staff in the office of the solicitor for the protection of the department and the public.
To secure uniformity in rulings and matters relating to policy, administration, and new questions of law, the routing of the legal work, which is of considerable magnitude, was changed by increasing the classes of cases sent to the solicitor for review.
During the fiscal year 1927 a total of 36,593 cases were disposed of in the solicitor's office, an increase of 2,646 cases over the previous year.
A classification of these matters will be found in the appendix of this report.
Compared with the preceding year, there was an increase of 689 in the number of public land cases disposed of.
There was also a slight increase in the number of appeals in pension cases, and a continued increase in the number of miscellaneous matters.
On July 1, 1926, there were pending in the various courts of the District of Columbia 37 cases in which the Secretary was a party defendant.
During the year 13 additional suits were filed; 25 suits have been disposed of by final orders or decrees, of which 21 were favorable to and 5 against the Secretary.
Some of the suits decided adversely are now on appeal.
Overproduction of oil and existing low prices emphasize the importance of my previous recommendation, which is now renewed, that legislation be enacted vesting in the Secretary of the Interior some discretion in the matter of leasing and developing the oil resources of the Osage Indian Reservation, Okla.
The Secretary is now required to offer annually for lease a large area of undeveloped oil lands, regardless of overproduction or other market conditions.
Such modification of law seems necessary if the Osage Tribe is to obtain the greatest ultimate benefit from the oil resources of its reservation, and is also important as a measure of conservation.
On the public domain there are no unleased proven oil areas of substantial importance.
Many permits for wildcatting are annually issued but very little production has resulted recently therefrom.
It has been my policy, however, to aid in the restriction of production from existing leases on the public domain by relieving of drilling requirements and permitting cessation of production on existing wells in all cases where the public interest will not suffer therefrom.
One of the important subjects before the department during the year was that of oil shales, immense areas of which exist in Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming.
Prior to February 25, 1920, these deposits were held to be subject to location and entry under the placer mining laws.
On that date Congress passed the general leasing act, which repealed the placer mining laws as applicable to such deposits, and provided that thereafter they would be subject to disposition only through lease.
One of the concluding sections of the act, however, provided "that valid claims existent at date of passage of this act, and thereafter maintained in compliance with the laws under which initiated" might be perfected under the prior existing laws.
Those prior laws required the claims to be located, a valuable deposit of mineral discovered, that not less than $100 worth of labor or improvements be placed upon the claims each year, and that as a prerequisite to patent not less than $500 should have been expended upon or for the development of each location.
Immediately prior to the enactment of the leasing act, numerous locations were made upon the shale areas under the placer mining laws, and many of these locations have been followed by applications for patent.
It became the duty of the department to consider these claims and to determine whether the locators had complied with the requirements of the general mining laws.
A public hearing, attended by many people interested, was held in the department on December 1, 1926, and the subject was thoroughly discussed.
Following this hearing, after extended consideration by the department, decision was rendered in the case of Freeman et al. v. Summers, involving, primarily, the question of what constitutes sufficiency of discovery upon certain shale placer mining claims.
The department applied the long-established rule that when the locator had discovered mineral within the limits of his claim in a situation and formation that the vein or deposit could be followed to depth, with reasonable assurance that paying minerals will be found, such discovery may form the basis of a patent, where compliance with the law has been had in other respects.
Field investigation is being made of all shale claims, to the end that valid rights may be protected and permitted to be perfected, but that invalid claims, where compliance with the laws has not been had, may be eliminated and canceled.
Many difficult questions of law and of fact necessarily arise in these cases, and while general rules of law may be applied, the facts of each case, as disclosed by investig tion and evidence, must govern the department in the disposition of the cases.
The stock-raising industry in the West needs encouragement.
The chief value of the remaining area of unreserved public lands in the United States, amounting to about 184,000,000 acres, is for its mineral deposits and grazing.
These uses of the land may be exercised concurrently without interference with each other.
Under the practice of unrestricted grazing by sufferance, the public lands have been overgrazed, to the detriment of the live stock industry and the homesteader, and controversies have arisen among those using the range.
The natural grasses have been depleted or destroyed, and watering places essential to grazing in semiarid or arid regions have not been fully protected or developed.
Under proper regulation, large areas of overgrazed land could be restored to productivity and natural forage growth be conserved.
A law for the regulation of stock grazing would insure substantial benefit to the industry.
The Secretary of the Interior should be authorized by law to designate lands chiefly valuable for their pasturage and to adopt such rules as will insure an equitable use of such areas.
Bills were introduced during the last Congress which would confer the necessary authority for stock-grazing regulation and leave unimpaired the operation of other public land laws except the stock raising homestead act, which should be repealed or its boundaries enlarged.
If the grazing bill is not adopted by Congress, I would suggest an amendment to the stock raising homestead law to permit stockraising homestead entries of a maximum area of 1,280 acres.
The present 640-acre stock-raising homestead is not sufficient to insure success to the entrymen, as lands of this type, productive enough to support a family, have been taken up.
The 14 States which maintain separate schools for colored children had in 1925, 2,537,638 such children between 5 and 17 years of age inclusive and enrolled 1,758,485 or 69.3 per cent of them in elementary and secondary schools for terms ranging from 111 to 184 days.
The department's relation to these schools is exactly that which it has in general to other public schools in the United States, that of an advisory, informing and consulting organization.
It advises longer terms, better teaching, adequate school plants, regular attendance and, in general, procedure that will improve the quality and quantity of education for the colored citizenry.
From 1913 to 1916, the Bureau of Education of the department made a comprehensive study of Negro education in the United States, with a view to learning the exact conditions and outlining methods for betterment.
At present, the department is making another survey of the Negro colleges and normal schools in order to determine their present status with respect to sources of financial support, training of the instructing staffs, size and character of student bodies, standards of admission and graduation.
Lack of recent and reliable information in regard to these and similar matters has made it difficult in some instances for graduates of Negro colleges to continue their studies in the leading graduate and professional schools.
At their own request, 78 Negro institutions are included in this study which will undoubtedly prove of much service to these institutions as well as to the institutions to which their graduates desire to go for further study.
In 1920 it inaugurated a series of annual conferences to be attended by the officials of and those interested in the 17 Negro land-grant colleges over which the department has a certain measure of administrative control through the allotment of Federal funds.
Although somé of these colleges were established as early as 1871, prior to 1910 few of them had made much progress.
Since then their growth has been comparatively rapid.
The Bureau of Education has held seven of the conferences mentioned.
As a result there has come about a complete reorganization of the curricula in agriculture, home economics, and industrial training.
The colleges have revised their teacher-training programs and are undertaking to prepare teachers for the State public schools, in their norm al courses and summer courses for teachers.
Further than that, the colleges have been made to feel a community of interest and the strength which lies in organization and cooperation.
They have formed their own association and are adopting standards on the same levels as other universities.
The awakened interest.
Recent legislatures in Louisiana, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina, made substantial appropriations for buildings and equipment.
The Louisiana program exceeded $300,000, that of North Carolina, $600,000.
Trustees have been advised as to their legal duties under Federal acts.
In two States where neglect was evident, the bureau intervened and insisted upon proper financial support by the State.
Howard University, an institution with 2,268 students in colleges of liberal arts, education, applied science, and music, and in professional schools of religion, law, and medicine, was founded in 1866.
It ranks high in all its departments.
Its medical school is one of the best in the United States.
While not administered by the Department of the Interior, the department has been its patron and helper in an intimate and definite sense since about 1885.
The annual appropriations made by Congress to the university are included in.
The university participates in departmental activities and exhibitions and looks to the Secretary of the Interior and various bureaus for advice and direction.
A fair measure of the university's success is undoubtedly due to this semiofficial patronage and help.
The first international conference on education, rehabilitation, reclamation, and recreation for countries bordering on the Pacificwas held in Hawaii during the fiscal year.
The conference was called by President Coolidge under a resolution of Congress, and convened at Honolulu on April 11, 1927, the sessions continuing for six days.
It was organized and sponsored by the department and the Secretary of the Interior was general chairman of the conference.
Called for the purpose'of establishing a basis of cooperation for promoting the peaceful arts and pursuits among the countries participating, the conference provided a medium for the exchange of knowledge on the subjects under discussion.
It was marked by a spirit of harmony throughout, and the interest and attendance of the delegates indicated its importance.
It was characterized as the most significant and practical conference yet held in the Pacific.
The sentiments of the conferees were expressed in a resolution adopted at the final session, which, among other things, suggested that because of the great value arising from the conference a similar one should be held during the next two years at such time and place as might be mutually agreed upon.
Besides the United States, Australia, Chile, Colombia, Fiji Islands and Western Pacific, France, Great Britain, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua, and Peru were represented.
Altogether there were in attendance 53 official delegates, representing governments, and 171 appointive members representing institutions, organizations and societies, or persons having a special interest in the deliberations.
Following its formal convening, the conference was divided into three sections: Education, under the general chairmanship of the Commissioner of Education; reclamation, under the general chairmanship of the Commissioner of Reclamation; and recreation, under the general chairmanship of the Director of the National Park Service.
The education section confined its deliberations to considering the exchange of educational ideas, the establishment and preservation of national standards for child life, and vocational education.
1. The encouragement of frequent visits of eminent university professors among the various countries.
2. The establishment of centers in the various countries where educational material might be collected, preserved, catalogued, and summarized for circulation.
3. Consideration of the desirability of giving recognition to the Japanese and Chinese languages in English-speaking countries on a basis similar to that given European languages.
4. Publishing educational information in the languages of the countries bordering on the Pacific.
5. Suggestion that the Bureau of Education, Department of the Interior, publish a glossary of educational terms, with a view to promoting uniformity in educational terminology.
6. Appointment of educational attachés.
7. Appointment of a Pan Pacific committee on cooperation between museums.
On the subject of vocational education, the conference favored more vocational guidance, accompanied by prevocational subjects, and followed by a program of vocational education in the public schools for those who do not expect to go to college or pursue the higher professions.
It also favored the rehabilitation of persons handicapped through accident or disease.
The reclamation section devoted itself to the consideration of the following topics.
Efforts of the State to aid homesteaders and build up communities of small-farm ownèrs; the relation of marketing agencies to the successful settlement of public lands; the relationship of the State to planting contracts and the homesteader's dealings with the mill or cannery at which his product is handled; methods for extending public credit to homestead-development enterprises; laws for the regulation and use of streams in irrigation; and engineering problems connected with the storage and distribution of water.
1) Its strong conviction that control of all water in rivers, streams, springs, lakes, marshes, and natural receptacles and water sources should vest in the Government.
2) The necessity of recognizing the fundamental requirements of land settlements that will assure the efficient and bona fide settler security of tenure, includmng extended terms of payment for the land, sympathetic assistance by means of advances of money for the preparation and establishment of the farm in its early stages, the providing, as far as practical, of social conveniences and means for recreation and the encouragement in every way of individual effort and initiative.
The recreation section discussed the vital relation of outdoor recreation to the health of the Nation; the important part that national parks' play in the outdoor recreation field; the place of national parks in an educational program; the protection and preservation of indigenous plants and animals; the administration and management of parks; and correlation of Government and private efforts along conservative lines, including establishment of State and municipal parks.
1) That every effort be made to conserve in their natural state, plant, animal, and bird life in certain defined areas.
2) That steps should be taken by all Governments for the preservation of those areas that should be set aside by reason of their natural and historic value and cared for by national or State appropriation.
3) That the governing authorities of the far eastern games be requested to include in its list of nations eligible to compete, all countries bordering on the Pacific Ocean, and that games be held during such years as not to interfere with the international Olympiads.
A statement showing expenses of the conference will be found on page 175 of this report.
While the public domain is gradually being absorbed into private ownership and no longer affords such an abundance of easy opportunities for the establishment of homes and the accumulation of wealth as it once did, it is still a vast empire offering promise of large returns from the proper exploitation of its mineral and grazing resources, not only to the individual but to the State and Nation as well.
There remain approximately 194,000,000 acres of unappropriated public lands in the United States, exclusive of the Territory of Alaska, an area practically equal to that of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, Virginia, West Virginia, and North Carolina.
There is, however, continued interest taken in the establishment of homes and cultivation of land for agricultural crops, as shown by the fact that there were approximately 6,600,000 acres included in original and final entries during the past fiscal year, exclusive of all other forms of filings under the public land laws, the greater part of this area being included in settlement and agricultural claims.
Title passed to such entrymen by patents during the past fiscal year for 4,456,000 acres.
In a large proportion of the patents issued previously the mineral content of the land was reserved to the United States to be administered as demand arises.
Mineral rights retained by the Government in entries patented under the stock raising homestead law, which provides for a reservation of all minerals, amount to 17,500,000 acres.
Rights to specific minerals have been retained in 12,500,000 acres.
In addition to the vacant unappropriated public land approximately 135,000,000 acres in Government ownership within the exterior limits of national forests are subject to all the provisions of the mining laws, including the general leasing act, making a total area of vacant land, plus mineral rights, under the jurisdiction of the General Land Office, outside of Alaska, of 359,000,000 acres.
The potential value of the public domain has been estimated to be approximately 26 billions of dollars, not including those lands to which the United States has reserved title to the mineral.
At the present rate of disposition of the public domain under the public land laws other than the mineral laws, many years' work is before the department, while under the mineral laws, including the leasing act, the business will continue indefinitely even after the last acre of the surface has been disposed of, and will demand an immense amount of work in the consideration and disposal of such cases.
The total receipts last year were $9,201,697.25, all of which was deposited in the Treasury and there distributed, under the law, as follows: Reclamation fund $4,338,341.72; to the public land States, $2,550,200.24; general fund of the United States, $1,692,460.63; and to the various Indian tribes $620,694.66.
Total expenditures for the conduct of the business of the General Land Office and its field activities amounted to $2,284,020.33, less than one-fourth of the receipts.
During the past three years material economies have been effected in the administration of the public lands and the expenditures during 1927 were over $86,000 less than in 1926 and $652,118.36 less than in 1924.
The Washington office effected a net reduction in force of 22 employees, by not filling vacancies resulting from death, resignation, retirement, or transfer.
By closing and consolidating district land offices the number was reduced on June 30, 1927, from 42 to 29, securing a reduction in field personnel of 15 clerks and 13 registers.
The Southern inspection division, comprising the States of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Missouri, with headquarters at Jackson, Miss., was abolished June 1, 1927.
The work in these States is now directed from Washington, D. C. At the same time the inspection work in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan, which had been directed from the Helena, Mont., inspection division headquarters, was placed under direct supervision from Washington, D. C.
The Cheyenne inspection ivision, comprising the States of Wyoming, South Dakota, and Nebraska, with headquarters at Cheyenne, Wyo., was abolished, the direction of the work in Wyoming and Nebraska being transferred to the headquarters of the Denver inspection division, and the work in South Dakota being transferred to the headquarters of the Helena inspection division.
The result of these changes is that the General Land Office, Washington, D. C., is transacting all the business, including correspondence and making of plats, formerly handled by the land offices in Alabama, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Wisconsin; and the field work in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Mississippi, and Wisconsin, is being directed from here, despite the reduction of 22 in the number of employees.
There are now 29 land offices, including 3 in Alaska.
Ten States have 1 land office each, five States have 2 land offices, and two States have 3 land offices.
The usual temporary detail of employees of the field surveying service to supplement the regular force of the division of surveys in disposing of the arrears of office work incidental to the surve and resurvey of the public lands has been continued, but the number of field employees so detailed has been substantially reduced.
The addition of two engineers to the permanent staff, one in January, 1926, and the other in July, 1926, has so increased the measure of efficient performance that it has been possible to restrict the details to an equivalent of three engineers on continuous service, although the personnel of the detail has changed from time to time.
The results obtained under this arrangement have proven satisfactory.
The sum made available for the inspection service was $430,000.
The average number of field employees, exclusive of 9 division inspectors, was 74.
The total amount of cash collected and turned into the Treasury by the field force was $67,620.59, and 185,937.77 acres were restored to the public domain, representing fraudulent entries.
There were investigated and reported 16,320 cases, of which 3,666 were adverse to entrymen and 12,654 favorable.
Sixty-two civil suits brought through the Department of Justice upon the recommendation of this department were won and 13 lost.
Forty thousand four hundred and forty-three dollars and thirty-six cents were recovered, and 7,218.51 acres were restored to the public domain as the results of such suits.
Fifty-nine indictments were returned for offenses under public land laws, and of the criminal cases tried 20 resulted in convictions under which there were 5 prison sentences.
There were secured from fines $7,211.
Expenditures for fighting forest fires amounted to $22,828.85 of the $25,000 appropriated.
The work of the cadastral engineering service is directed in the feld by the supervisor of surveys with headquarters at Denver, Colo.
For administrative purposes the United States, including Alaska, is divided into 10 coordinate districts.
The amount available for the cadastral engineering service during the year, including $810,000 appropriated for the survey and resurvey of the public lands, was $888,518.58.
1,176,315 acres of resurveys, comprising an aggregate area of 5,160,072 acres.
The change in type of field work required to meet modern problems of location, title, and development on the public domain is becoming more marked each year and is clearly reflected in the steadily decreasing mileage of original subdivisional surveys and in the broadening scope and volume of surveys related to but not essentially a part of the rectangular net, classed as miscellaneous.
This situation is due primarily to the falling off in agricultural settlement on unsurveyed lands throughout the west and to the gradual movement of population and activities to areas covered by the rapidly deteriorating markers and often faulty original surveys.
In the class of field work that may still be regarded as measurable on a mileage basis there are included all surveys and resurveys under the rectangular system that are based primarily on the requirements of agricultural settlement and industrial expansion, as well as those made for administrative and other special purposes.
Such work, amounting to 17,877.7.
Miscellaneous surveys of all classes were made throughout the territory of the public domain.
Included in the year's accomplishments in this steadily expanding field are 38 field investigations of erroneous or fictitious surveys in California, Colorado, Idaho, New Mexico, Oregon, Washington, and Florida, while surveys to determine riparian rights resulting from accretions and avulsions along rivers and to define swamp and overflowed lands and lands erroneously omitted in the original survey were made in Colorado, Oregon, Wyoming, Wisconsin, Oklahoma, Missouri, Arkansas, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Florida.
Special surveys grouped in the miscellaneous class and executed include 10 townsites in Alaska, Idaho, New Mexico, Oregon, and Florida; 45 islands in California, Nebraska, Idaho, Montana, Washington, Wyoming, Minnesota, Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois, Kansas, and Florida; and 31 lighthouse reservations, 17 isolated homestead surveys, and 1 cemetery site in Alaska.
Other surveys in this class include those of a lake segregation in Nebraska, 23 mineral segregations, and 21 isolated tract surveys west of the one hundred and fifth meridian; 4 military reservation boundaries in Alaska, Idaho, Washington, and Florida; 3 Spanish-grant boundaries, and a small holding claim in New Mexico and an Indian village in Alaska.
The program of extending resurveys over oil-shale areas in western Colorado was continued, while the survey of lands deemed valuable for oil and oil shale in southeastern and eastern Utah, along the Colorado, San Juan, and Green Rivers, was carried forward on a large scale.
Under the cooperative program with other governmental agencies, extensive operations were conducted in several fields of activity.
Original surveys and resurveys were executed upon application of the Forest Service in all western surveying districts and in the States of Michigan and Florida, including two forest elimination surveys in Alaska.
Resurveys in the Rocky Mountain National Park, Colo., were continued, and original surveys in the Glacier National Park, Mont., were initiated, as were resurveys for the identification of the Carlsbad National Monument, N. Mex., for the National Park Service.
In the interests of location in coal and oil areas, resurveys were made in Utah and Wyoming and of the east boundary of the Navajo Treaty Reservation, N. Mex., for the Bureau of Mines.
Approximately 400 private land claims within the boundaries of the Sandia Indian Pueblo grant in New Mexico were surveyed at the request of the Pueblo Lands Board in order to provide appropriate basis for the adjudication of the private rights involved.
The work of connecting the rectangular net with geodetic positions in Nevada and California was completed under existing authorizations in cooperation with the Coast and Geodetic Survey, while therectangular net in the Great Salt Lake Basin, Utah, was extended in cooperation with the Geological Survey.
There was also surveyed a bird reservation in the Halifax River, Fla., for the Department of Agriculture.
The slight increase in the apportionment for surveys from the Office of Indian Affairs was reflected in greater activity on several of the Indian reservations.
Extensive surveys were carried on in the Blackfeet Reservation and in boundary and township surveys within the Cheyenne Reservation, Mont., where practically the entire field corps of that district was engaged during the latter part of the year.
Surveys were also extended in four townships in the Navajo Indian Reservation and boundary and subdivisional surveys were executed in 16 townships within the Papago Reservation in Arizona.
Allotment surveys in accordance within the demands were made in the Hoopa Valley, Calif., the Leech Lake, Minn.
Tract surveys within the town of Bernalillo, N. Mex., on the Sandia Indian Pueblo grant, and on the Lac du Flambeau Reservation, Wis., were executed, while an investigation and survey of two islands in the Big Wind River was made in the Shoshone Indian Reservation, Wyo.
The demand for islands and water frontage for summer and winter homes continues.
As a rule, the islands and shore spaces are small, and extended investigations are necessary to determine whether the areas are public.
In connection with such cases action was taken on 149 applications involving fragmentary surveys.
The map of the United States, 1927 edition, showing graphically the extent of the surveys of the public lands, national parks, and reservations, county seat locations, lines of railroads, towns, cities, private-land grants, irrigation projects, and the acquisitions of our public domain, lighthouse and other stations, has been revised.
State maps of Utah and Florida have been issued.
Maps of New Mexico and Michigan are now being printed.
The map of California is in preparation.
There were sold 18,940 photolithographic copies of township plats and 3,965 copies were furnished to governmental agencies for official use.
The area of public and Indian lands on which original entry was made and allowed was 3,594,838 acres compared with 3,243,446 acres for 1926.
There were received homestead and kindred entries numbering 50,298 as against 44,524 in 1926, and there were patented 13,952 homestead entries as compared with 12,903 the previous year.
Applications for second entry, amendments, extensions of time, leaves of absence, original homesteads, and appeals acted upon during the year were 32,893 as against 25,641 in 1926.
Seven new stock driveways were established and 24 modified.
The area withdrawn for such purposes aggregated 27,020 acres and that released from such withdrawals 15,977 acres.
The total area included in driveway withdrawals at the close of the year was 9,185,522 acres.
Town sites were opened as follows.
First addition to Ford, Calif., under section 2381, United States Revised Statutes, 284 lots were sold for $61,759; Algoma, Oreg.
Thirty-six town-site entries were considered and 11 town-site entries were approved for patenting.
Three hundred and thirteen railroad rights-of-way and 1,198 irrigation and miscellaneous rights-of-way applications were received.
Twenty-three forfeiture suits were recommended and 22 secured as result of proceedings.
Sixty-four such suits are now pending.
Since the passage of the act of August 11, 1916, providing fo the establishment of State irrigation districts, 32 applications for approval under the provisions of the act have reached the General Land Office, and of these, two, embracing approximately 36,257.77 acres, were received during this year.
Since the act of May 15, 1922, 36 contracts embracing lands in 31 irrigation districts of a total area of 1,044,100.71 acres, have been entered into.
Complaints continue to come in indicating that in some States irrigation districts, without first securing approval as provided by these acts, have levied assessments on public lands and attempted to enforce their collection by tax sales.
In at least three cases, attention to which was directed late in the year, the matter has been referred to the field with instructions that the offending districts be requested to cancel all such illegal assessments, to surrender all certificates of sales to the proper county official for cancellation, and to reconvey all lands (where a deed to the districts has been executed), in order that the clouds on the title to the lands involved may be removed.
Fourteen original and 16 supplemental reports were received as the result of investigations of private irrigation districts upon which claimants and applicants under the desert-land law were depending for their water supply, making a total of 1,351 such projects reported on since the adoption of the regulations of September 30, 1910.
There was collected the sum of $50,314.94 as against $13,100.81 last year, from permittees and grantees in connection with the use and occupancy of public lands for hydroelectric power development and transmission under permits and grants made by this department.
Sixty-nine withdrawals under the Federal water power act were made during 1927 for an area of 71,751 acres, of which 54,103 acres are situated in national forests.
Carey Act withdrawals, segregations, and patent applications, for a total of 1,216,392.23 acres, received consideration.
Desert-land entries, filings and proofs, comprising 3,738 cases, were before the office, and action thereon was taken as follows: Approved, 1,139; canceled, 667; held for rejection, 1,178; preliminary disposition, 270.
Reclamation filings and entries for lands in 25 projects, located in 14 States, to the number of 1,630, were received for original and supplemental action, and 1,551 disposed of.
Therewere 42 orders of reclamation restorations and 10 of withdrawals, 4 changes in the form of withdrawal, and 3 adjustments.
The restored area totals 50,642 acres, and the area withdrawn, 77,802 acres.
There were 5 openings to entry under the reclamation act involving 376 irrigated farm units.
Public lands to the extent of 1,909,688 acres were placed in a state of reservation, either by Executive or departmental orders, pursuant to various applicable acts, and 2,493,806 acres theretofore reserved were restored to entry or other proper disposition.
Action was taken on 5,796 cases involving entries or purchases of ceded Indian lands in Indian reservations.
Regulations were issued under the act of June 14, 1926, authorizing acquisition or used of public lands by States, counties, or cities for recreational purposes, and public lands aggregating 1,440 acres were withdrawn thereunder.
Subject to the provisions of public resolutions approved February 14, 1920, and January 21 and December 28, 1922, granting preference rights to the veterans of the World War, there were released from withdrawals, or opened to entry through survey or resurvey, 215,888 acres and 3,434,116 acres, respectively.
There was an active interest in the States'swamp-land grants.
Selections aggregating 164,745.33 acres were received, as against 27,009.08 acres in 1926.
The area selected this year was, therefore, more than six times as large as that selected last year.
Marin Islands, located in San Francisco Bay, Calif., and formerly included within a military reservation, now abandoned, was offered at public sale September 16, 1926.
The islands contained 12.38 acres, and had been appraised at $300 per acre.
The lands brought $25,461, about seven times the appraised price.
Other successful sales of lands within abandoned military reservations were of the Wilmot military target range, located near Tucson, in Pima County, Ariz., the 10 small abandoned military reservations in Louisiana, and buildings and improvements on the abandoned Fort Davis Reservation in Alaska.
In all, 258 cases, affecting lands within abandoned military reservations, were received, of which 236 were adjudicated.
Chippewa logging operations in Minnesota resulted in the cutting under contract of 1,892,910 feet board measure of timber at the purchase price of $10,504.32.
The total timber cut under the provisions of the act of June 27, 1902, providing for the logging of the Chippewa Indian lands is 1,320,318,807 feet, besides 2,274 cords of pulpwood, and 228,737 ties, posts, and poles, all valued at $9,381,531.41.
In the annual report of the General Land Office for 1925 the enactment of a number of laws for the protection, development, and utilization of the public lands in the Territory of Alaska were recommended, and during the Sixty-ninth Congress the following laws were passed in conformity with such recommendations.
The act of April 12, 1926, authorizes the exportation of all timber lawfully cut from the public lands in Alaska.
Prior to the passage of the act such exportation was confined to pulpwood or wood pulp and to birch in so far as the timber grew on unreserved public lands.
The new law restricts exportation only in cases where the local timber supply would be endangered.
The act of May 25, 1926, permits the disposition of Indian possessions in town sites in Alaska, as well as of the town sites of the natives.
A very unsatisfactory condition existed with reference to such Indian possessions and native town sites prior to the enactment of the law.
The act of July 3, 1926, provides for the leasing of public lands in Alaska suitable for fur farming.
The purpose of the law is to encourage the propagation of fur-bearing animals and promote development of the industry in Alaska.
Regulations under this act were issued January 22, 1927, and 18 applications for leases have been received.
Provision was made for the purchase of home sites, not exceeding 5 acres, by the act of March 3, 1927.
The right to so purchase is confined to a citizen of the United·States 21 years of age, who is engaged in trade, manufacture, or other productive industry, or is employed by citizens of the United States.
Intructions under this law were approved April 23, 1927.
The act of March 4, 1927, enables the Secretary of the Interior to establish grazing districts upon any public lands in Alaska, with the exception of the Aleutian Islands Reservation and certain other reservations.
Leases are to be made for grazing on a definite area and for a term of 20 years, except where the particular circumstances require a different period.
The amount of the grazing fee is to be determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
It is hoped that this legislation will greatly stimulate the raising of cattle, sheep, goats, and reindeer in Alaska.
The selections by States as indemnity for losses on account of school grants amounted to 167,526.65 acres, and for quantity or other specific grants, 1,916.98 acres.
There were conveyed to the States 146,773.68 acres school indemnity and 2,064.31 acres quantity grant lands; 34,202.72 acres of indemnity school selections and 1,295 acres of quantity selections were rejected.
Title to 34,462.95 acres was conveyed to States under cooperative agreements providing for the exchange of school section lands within the boundaries of national forests for other lands within such boundaries.
In all, conveyances to the States have reached the aggregate of 261,031.17 acres.
On January 25, 1927, Congress extended the school grant to include unappropriated mineral school sections in place.
Public resolution approved June 5, 1924, created a joint congressional committee which was empowered and directed to make a thorough and complete investigation of the land grants of the Northern Pacific Railroad Co. and the facts and the laws pertaining theretc.
House joint resolution of March 3, 1927, extended the life of the committee to the end of the Seventieth Congress and suspended action on the grant by the department until July 1, 1928.
The General Land Office has cooperated with the committee and has supplied it with numerous items of general and specific information.
Railroad Co., and for reacquiring the title to the grants made to the Coos Bay Wagon Road Co., together with the numerous amendments of such acts, were the basis for extended activities of this office in the year 1927.
Thirty-two thousand acres of revested cutover lands upon which the timber had been sold and removed were restored and declared subject to entry with the usual preferences to ex-service men, beginning March 15, 1927.
Sales of timber of Oregon & California Railroad grant lands involved 8,949.69 acres, containing 258,478,000 feet board measure of timber, for which the sum of $556,654.61 was:received.
Total sales to date involve an area of 74,233.64 acres, containing 1,405,670,000 feet of timber, from which the sum of $4,090,893.42 has been received.
The Coos Bay timber sales from 1,528.31 acres, involving 53,622,000 feet of timber, realized $114,303.
Total receipts to date from Coos Bay timber sales, $1,087,287.54.
The act of July 13, 1926, for the relief of certain counties in Oregon and Washington, provided in effect that 18 counties in Oregon and one in Washington should receive in cash from the Federal Government the equivalent of what they would have collected in the form of taxes during the years 1916 to 1926, inclusive, had the former Oregon and California grant lands remained in private ownership.
The amount in lieu of tax is fixed by the assessed valuation for the year 1915, and the rates prevailing for the several purposes in each county, school district, port district, or civil subdivision thereof for each of such years, and it is made the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to ascertain the amounts so due and certify them to the Treasury Department for payment.
The extent of the claims, the fact that the rates of taxation and boundaries of the districts vary in the several counties and subdivisions from year to year, and that the task was one somewhat outside the usual scope of land-office work, necessitated the organization of a special unit to adjudicate such claims.
Ten examiners were exclusively engaged on this work for a considerable period, in addition to the services rendered by the reviewing, drafting, and stenographic forces of the office.
The claims of all counties for the years 1916 to 1925, inclusive, were adjudicated and paid, with the exception of the one from Clackamas County, Oreg.
The amounts claimed by the 18 counties were $6,741,466.94.
They were approved to the extent of $6,022,433.44, and disallowed to the extent of $266,969.34.
Claims of 16 of the counties for the year 1926 for $669,860.98 were received, and four of the claims were adjudicated.
Tribal Indian allotments numbering 2,739 were received and disposed of.
Five thousand and eight trust patents were issued with an aggregate acreage of 384,310.40 acres.
There were also issued 1,121 patents for those portions of allotments designated under the law as the homesteads of the allottees, containing 217,248.20 acres.
In addition there were issued 1,400 patents conveying title to Indians or their heirs or assigns to 174,048.79 acres; such areas had theretofore been held by the United States in trust.
Applications to the number of 2,575 for allotment of lands on the public domain under section 4, act of February 8, 1887, were adjudicated.
The improved condition of the mining industry has resulted in a substantial increase in mineral entries and applications.
Mineral entries numbering 1,582, an increase of 252 over last year, were received.
Of those disposed of 468 were approved for patent, 12 canceled, and 1,102 suspended.
Three coal entries were approved for patent covering 240 acres, based on rights initiated under the coal-land laws prior to the enactment of the mineral leasing act of February 25, 1920.
Two thousand one hundred and eleven applications, permits, leases, and licenses, under the coal-leasing act, and 2,112 cases were disposed of.
Eighty-six coal-prospecting permits issued covering 96,308.58 acres, and 25 coal leases were made covering 7,350.32 acres.
Fifteen coal licenses involve 639.95 acres.
Fifty-nine potash permits were issued under the act of October 2, 1917, embracing 138,819.29 acres.
Eleven sodium permits were issued for 26,229.11 acres.
Oil and gas applications for prospecting permits and leases continued quite active under the several sections of the general mineral-leasing act.
Under sections 13 and 20 of the act, 4,829 new applications were received, and 53,091 cases for reconsideration, an increase of 17 and 22,888 applications, respectively, over last year.
Permits were granted on 4,805, an increase of 968.
Final rejections in whole or in part numbered 53,945.
Seven hundred and sixty-two assignments were acted upon and 4,019 applications for extensions of time were disposed of.
Fiftyeight thousand seven hundred and fifty cases were examined.
The receipts from bonuses, rentals, and royalties under the law providing for the leasing of mineral rights on the public domain were $6,669,518.76.
Three national forests have been enlarged, 13 have been reduced, and one interforest transfer has been effected under the act of June 4, 1897.
Four forests have been reduced and nine enlarged under special acts of Congress.
There are now 159 national forests, embracing 183,938,106 acres, of which more than 86 per cent is public land.
Rights which are known as land scrip will always be in demand.
These rights enable the locator or selector to obtain title without the requirement of residence, improvements, and cultivation.
One hundred and twenty-four of these rights were adjudicated, and five selections with certificates of right were approved for patenting.
These involved Choctaw, Valentine, Ware, and Wyandotte scrip.
The act of July 3, 1926, amended the act of March 4, 1913, so as to permit the sale at public auction or through sealed bids of all dead or down timber and timber seriously or permanently damaged by forest fires on vacant lands of the United States outside of national forests.
Many applications have been received to purchase timber under the act.
Notwithstanding departmental decisions in the cases of Ben McLendon and John Adams, homestead applications for lands to which patent has already issued, including land within the exterior limits of private land claims, are still being received.
The filing of such applications can only result in disappointment to the applicants and in burdening the General Land Office with matters over which it has no jurisdiction.
It was hoped that the departmental decisions above mentioned would so demonstrate the futility of such applications that they would cease, but recently 300 were received, which must necessarily be rejected.
Two hundred and fourteen private land claims have been acted upon and 27 approved for patenting.
Contests, Government and private, received, 2,403, which, together with those on hand at the beginning of the year, numbered 2,928; 2,763 were disposed of, leaving pending only 165 cases.
There were stated 715 accounts under the repayment laws, the total so allowed being $45,883.70; 138 claims for repayment were denied.
Twentytwo thousand seven hundred and ninety-six patents, embracing 4,456,893 acres, were issued, not including the area covered by reissued patents, Indian fee patents, supplemental patents issued under the act of April 14, 1914, and patents issued as further evidence of title, where the records of the original patents are unsigned and incomplete.
The total area patented during the year exceeds the combined land area of the States of Connecticut and Delaware by more than 114,000 acres, and of such total 3,421,813 acres were issued under the various homestead laws.
There were 225 cases under the so-called Pittman Act for the irrigation of arid land in Nevada received and disposed of.
Patents under the stock raising homestead acts, to the extent of 17,494,736 acres, have been issued since the approval of such acts, and of this area, 2,400,604.81 acres were embraced in patents during the year 1927.
Aside from areas set apart for public purposes, such as national forests, parks, water power, stock-driveway withdrawals, and other Government reservations, there remain in the public domain 193,737,588 acres, of which 139,886,998 acres are unsurveyed.
In addition, there are approximately 135,000,000 acres in Government ownership within the exterior limits of national forests which are subject to all the provisions of the mining laws, including the general leasing act.
17,500,000 acres patented under the stock raising homestead law, and in more than 12,500,000 acres the deposits of coal, oil, and other minerals are specifically reserved.
The revival of the livestock industry during the past year is most gratifying and emphasizes the importance of protection and improvement of the public grazing lands.
As recommended in another part of this report, a measure for the regulation of grazing on the public domain should be enacted.
The stock-raising acts and the desert-land laws should be repealed, and the timber and stone law should be modified by eliminating therefrom the provision authorizing the purchase of lands chiefly valuable for their timber but retaining the clause permitting the sale of lands chiefly valuable for stone.
Provision should be made for the disposition of the public lands within 3 miles of the coast in Alabama, Florida, and Mississippi, and the islands off the coast or in the coastal waters of such States, together with the lands bordering on meandered lakes and all islands therein in the States of Michigan and Wisconsin, and those within 3 miles of the shores of Lakes Michigan, Huron, and Superior, now withdrawn by the authority of the President.
House of Representatives bill 9006 and Senate bill 3224, Sixty-ninth Congress, applicable to the lands in Alabama, Florida, and Mississippi, if amended to include those in Michigan and Wisconsin and on the three Great Lakes mentioned, would effect the purpose.
The Interior Department, by reason of its organization and experience is well qualified to dispose of, to advantage, all lands belonging to the Government not now needed for the purposes secured.
The act of July 5, 1884, provides for the transfer to the Department of the Interior of abandoned military reservations, but the act does not include the transfer to this department or the disposition of other useless reservations.
The act of July 5, 1884, should be so amended and extended as to include all abandoned Government reservations.
It frequently happens that lands have been held and occupied for a period of many years under the belief that the title is good, where, as a matter of fact, it is still in the Government.
The Secretary is not authorized under existing law to grant relief in such cases, and as a rule it takes years to secure the needed legislation.
There should be a general law authorizing the Secretary in his discretion to issue a patent, for not exceeding 160 acres, upon the payment of $1.25 per acre, where it is shown to his satisfaction that the lands have been held for more than 20 years under color of title.
The enactment of a bill similar to Senate bill 2740, Sixty-ninth Congress, will supply the needed legislation.
The Commissioner of the General Land Office, under section 2455, Revised Statutes, as amended, may order into the market and sell isolated or disconnected tracts not exceeding 160 acres in area, at not less than $1.25 per acre.
Prior to any sale there is a field investigation by an inspector who places a valuation on the tract and the law is a convenient means by which scattering areas are disposed of to advantage.
But in many cases the tracts, not otherwise desirable, exceed 160 acres in quantity, and authority should be given the Secretary to order into market tracts not exceeding 320 acres in area.
The laws providing for rights of way should be harmonized and consolidated.
They were passed at various dates to meet conditions then pressing.
Under some of them the approval by the Secretary of a map location conveys a fee while in others the Secretary may revoke at will a permit under which large investments have been made.
Title in fee should not pass by the approval of a location.
The Secretary should be authorized to declare a forfeiture of all rights of way where there has been a failure to construct or where, after construction, there has been a continued abandonment of the project.
The work Public Domain, published by the authority of Congress in 1883, is a compendium of historical facts, laws, public and private, and treaties affecting the public lands.
Its tables exhibit the operation of the laws and grants prior to and including the year 1881.
It is of major service to examiners and attorneys in the interpretation and application of the public land laws and it is invaluable to the student of public land acquisition and distribution.
Since its publication the public land laws have been made over to a large extent, and there is no counterpart of this volume covering public land activities since 1883.
To find the applicable laws, treaties, proclamations, decisions, and regulations controlling the disposition of the public land one must search through 35 volumes of the United States Statutes at Large, 50 volumes of Land Decisions, hundreds of Federal and State reports, and for recent years alone upward of a thousand circular regulations.
There is urgent need for a second edition of Public Domain, bringing it down to the present.
I recommend, therefore, legislation authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to proceed with the preparation of a second volume of Public Domain, and that he be further authorized to cause the publication of such work upon its completion.
The act of July 5, 1884, governing the disposal of abandoned military reservations is too rigid to meet the problems growing out of abandoned rights of way, consisting in one instance of a strip 100 feet wide and more than a thousand miles long, in the Territory of Alaska.
The amendment of the aforesaid act of July 5, 1884, is recommended in order to provide a more elastic method of disposing of such abandoned reservations.
The effects of the reorganization of the medical service of the Indian Bureau are becoming increasingly more apparent.
The district medical directors visited nearly all of the jurisdictions within their districts and made many recommendations for improvement of the service rendered which were carried into effect.
They have been able to establish cordial relations with the State and local health authorities which greatly assist the work.
The salaries of physicians in the two lower grades were reallocated with a consequent improvement in the morale.
The effect of these increased salaries is also apparent in recruiting new physicians to fill vacancies.
It is, however, still impossible to obtain a sufficient number of physicians with the required qualifications to fill all vacancies.
The diseases against which the greatest efforts must be directed continue to be trachoma and tuberculosis, but progress has been and is being made in controlling both of these diseases.
During the year the school at Fort Defiance, Ariz., and the Tohatchi School in New Mexico were selected for the reception of children afflicted with trachoma and their treatment by a trained personnel.
Other schools have been set aside for the use of pupils free from trachoma to prevent the spread of the disease from the afflicted to the well children.
The boarding school at Zuni, N. Mex., was converted into a sanatorium school for children of that jurisdiction having incipient tuberculosis.
The additional dormitory and the hospital authorized for the Fort Lapwai Sanatorium were completed and are now ready to receive patients.
The new equipment installed includes a complete X-ray apparatus.
The hospitals at the Fort Peck and Blackfeet Agencies in Montana have also been equipped with small X-ray facilities which should prove of great value as aids to diagnosis and treatment in the medical work at these points.
The hospital at Klamath Agency was completed near the end of the year.
The first use to which it was put was in connection with a survey of that reservation conducted by the National Tuberculosis Association aided by the Oregon State organization and by a special physician of this service.
The construction of the hospital authorized for the Choctaws of Mississippi has been delayed because of failure as yet to obtain clear title to the land.
The new hospital at Fort Peck, Mont., was opened for patients in January.
The building was not entirely completed but is now operating at about half capacity.
Facilities have been provided at all of the general hospitals for advanced cases of tuberculosis which will not or can not be cared for in the established sanatoria.
The segregation of such cases from contact with their families and others will be of material assistance in the prevention of the spread of this disease to which the Indian is generally very susceptible.
The tuberculosis sanatoria of the Indian Service were well patronized during the past fiscal year, several of them being kept full to capacity and the others being utilized to a greater extent than ever before.
This increased attendance is due, in a large measure, to the effects of health education in the schools and among the adults of the reservation.
The nursing service was increased numerically during the year.
Changes made in the organization of the nursing personnel will improve the conditions under which the work must be done and will have a tendency to attract a high type of nurse to the Indian Service.
Inquiries concerning the positions were received from a greater number of nurses than during the prior year.
The public health nursing work has been better organized and the quality of work is improving steadily.
New positions of this nature have been established in five places.
Plans for introducing the platoon system in Indian boarding schools were extended to only eight schools because of insufficient funds.
The schools so selected are at Carson, Nev.
Cheyenne and Arapaho, Okla.
Fort Sill, Okla.
Mount Pleasant, Mich.
Pima, Ariz.
Rapid City, S. Dak.
Seneca, Okla, and Wahpeton, N. Dak At several of these schools money was not available to secure the necessary teachers.
While the system properly applied utilizes during classroom hours all available school space, including the auditorium, effecting an economy of space and time for the pupils, yet a sufficient number of teachers must be employed to give the continuous instruction involved.
The stringency in the amounts appropriated for the schools has sometimes prevented the purchase of essential food and other supplies.
As these expenses and other overhead expenses must be first met, sufficient funds may not and have not always remained with which to employ the additional teachers or employees to give the instruction required under the platoon system.
Reports of examinations from nearly all of the schools have shown a high percentage of promotions earned to the next higher grade.
The service has looked forward to morning and afternoon classroom sessions for all pupils of the first, second, and third grades, and eventually of all six elementary grades, in lieu of the long continued practice of one-half day only of instruction proper and onehalf day work detail.
In many schools, however, there have not been enough teachers to conduct all-day classes, even for the first three grades.
It has been recognized in the past that too much institutional routine labor, detrimental to educational advancement, has been required of the pupils.
The three-fourths-one-fourth day plan announced in the report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for the fiscal year 1926 was intended to alleviate this condition to some extent.
In May of this year further steps were taken to provide additional free time for the pupils, without employment other than their own pursuits, or perhaps supervised but nondirected pastimes.
The following table compares the enrollment by grades of Indian children in Government schools for the years 1926 and 1927.
Organized teaching of home making has been extended to all schools having junior and senior high grades, to a large number of the elementary boarding schools and to two day schools.
There are now 60 home economic teachers stationed in 44 schools.
The primary purpose of this instruction is the improvement of living standards in the present-day Indian homes.
Many new centers of this instruction consist of small homes at the school which may serve as a standard for the reservation and its occupants.
The school at Shiprock, Northern Navajo jurisdiction, N. Mex., has an improved hogan with furnishings which can be transported by wagon.
The Ute Mountain School, Colo., has a small adobe house with fireplaces in each room, and the Taos and Zuni day schools, New Mexico, each have cottages of the accepted village type.
Care of the child is taught.
Chilocco, Okla., is the only school thus far to have a baby in its practice cottage, but the very young children in the schools have served for teaching purposes.
Much emphasis has been placed on development of desirable food and clothing standards which may pass to the everyday life of the Indian girl and of the Indian home.
The home economics teachers have been encouraged to spend at least one month of the school vacation visiting Indian homes in order that their plans for teaching might more nearly meet the needs of the local group of Indians.
The summer employment of Indian girls in good homes has become an aid to this department of the educational service and during the year 700 school girls received the best type of experience in real homes.
Improvement in the teaching personnel has been accomplished by requiring instructors attending summer sessions in universities or normal schools to take courses in curriculum construction, in addition to other subjects chosen.
Curriculum revision was also assigned as the major topic for reading circle activities during the year, based upon a preliminary community survey of the Indians, their home conditions, ideals, habits, opportunities, and requirements.
The number of Indian children attending State public schools increases from year to year and the considerable number of Indians who have now obtained their education in the public schools like other citizens of the States is an evidence of the gradual advancement of these races to a place in the body politic.
During the school year 1926–27, 35,124 Indian children attended public schools.
For a percentage of them tuition was paid by the Government at a predetermined rate per pupil for each day of attendance.
For the fiscal year authorities were issued for payments to 691 school districts for a prospective total attendance of 9,487 children, and there was allotted to cover anticipated obligations therefor a total of $336,192 from the appropriation of $350,000 by Congress for this purpose.
In addition, tuition was authorized to be paid for 1,032 Chippewa children in Minnesota and 41 Klamath children in Oregon from the funds of the respective tribes.
The rate per day per pupil varied from 20 to 60 cents, dependent upon the size and financial condition of the different schools, averaging between 35 and 40 cents.
The bureau has continued the plan of consolidating units wherever such action can be taken without loss of efficiency.
The Seger and Cantonment jurisdictions in Oklahoma were placed under the Cheyenne and Arapahoe superintendency, with headquarters at Concho, Okla.
The Salt River and the Camp Verde Agencies were placed under the jurisdiction of the superintendent of the Phoenix School, Ariz.
The Moapa River Agency, Nev., becomes a subagency under the Kaibab jurisdiction, now the Paiute Agency, Cedar City, Utah.
The superintendent of Haskell Institute, Kans., has jurisdiction over the Potawatomi Agency.
In Wisconsin the Grand Rapids jurisdiction was placed in charge of the superintendent of the Tomah School, while the Laona and the La Pointe Agencies in that State and the Mackinac Agency in Michigan have been placed under the Lac du Flambeau superintendency.
In addition to the foregoing 75 allotments were made to Indians residing on the public domain in various States, embracing 10,730.73 acres.
During the year both cash and deferred payment sales of individual Indian land holdings were consummated; sales of 430 original allotments and of 854 tracts of inherited lands aggregated a total of 141,422 acres.
The total consideration received for these lands was $1,758,730, which was less than the total receipts for the prior year although the acreage was somewhat greater.
There were received 657 applications from allottees for patents in fee, but only 272 justified favorable action and the issuance of the patents desired, somewhat less in number than during the prior year.
There were also issued 50 certificates of competency and orders for removal of restrictions.
A matter of especial importance was the passage of the act of February 26, 1927, which authorized the cancellation of patents in fee issued without application for or consent of the patentee in cases where the land has been neither encumbered nor sold.
Pursuant to this legislation and to decisions of the Federal court a number of patents heretofore issued were canceled.
See United States v. Benewah County, Idaho, and United States v. Kootenai County, Idaho, 290 Fed. Rep., 628.)
The trust period was extended by the President upon the recommendation of the department on allotments made to Indians within the following reservations: Sac and Fox, Kans.
White Earth, Minn.
Omaha, Sac, and Fox, and Winnebago, Nebr.
Cheyenne and Arapaho, Modoc, Ottawa, Citizen Pottawatomie, Seneca, Absentee Shawnee and Wyandotte, Okla.
Oneida, Wis.
By act of Congress approved February 8, 1927, the period of trust on lands patented to the Capitan Grande Band of Mission Indians, California, was extended for 10 years from March 9, 1924.
One tract of land containing 5 acres was purchased for use by homeless Indians in the vicinity of Healdsburg, Sonoma County, Calif., affording them school facilities and labor opportunities.
This land is an addition to 45 acres purchased last fiscal year for the Dry Creek and Geyserville Bands, consisting of 92 persons.
The sum of $3,000 has been obligated for the proposed purchase of 70 acres near Buena Vista, Amador County, Calif., for members of the Mewuk Band.
The Indians occupying both tracts are under the jurisdiction of the Sacramento Indian Agency.
To date approximately $198,000 has been expended for 9,312 acres of land for homeless Indians in California.
There is now pending the proposed purchase of four tracts of land under the jurisdiction of the Choctaw Indian Agency, containing a total of 333 acres.
An expenditure of $3,447 is involved, and the land will provide homes for at least eight Indian families, or approximately 40 persons.
To date approximately $32,015 has been expended in the purchase of 820 acres, which have been resold to full-blood Mississippi Choctaws under the reimbursable plan.
Operation of the Federal tax acts of May 6, 1910 and December 30, 1916, subjecting to State taxation the allotments of Omaha and Winnebago Indians in Nebraska held under extension of trust periods has caused hardship and embarrassment to the Indian allottees affected, as many of the tracts were yielding little income in excess of the tax levied.
Under a principle of law recognized by the courts, real property held in trust by the Federal Government is not taxable by the State and exemption from taxation of property purchased for noncompetent Indians with their trust funds has been heretofore effected through restrictive clauses inserted in deeds conveying such lands to Indians.
Exemption rights so specified have been generally sustained by the courts.
This situation is such as to indicate the necessity for remedial legislation.
Indians of western Washington, suit filed August 21, 1926.
Chippewa tribe of Minnesota, suits filed February 26, April 2, and April 13, 1927.
Colville and Okanogan, Washington, suit filed March 28, 1927.
Spokane Tribe, of Washington, suit filed March 28, 1927.
The act of June 4, 1924, provided for the making of a final tribal roll of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians of North Carolina preparatory to allotment of the reservation lands in severalty and the per capita payment of their tribal funds.
More than 16,000 enrollment applications, and approximately 450 contested enrollment cases are pending for determination.
It is believed that the work will not be completed in the field until some time in the fall of 1927.
Activity of the local and State highway authorities in securing rights of way for and in constructing and improving public highways across Indian lands in all sections of the country continued unabated and approximately 200 right-of-way applications were received and approved covering more than 1,000 miles of road.
New leases were made on 78,286 acres of allotted lands belonging to Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes during the year, or approximately 18,000 acres less than were leased during the prior year.
The allottees received a revenue therefrom of $4,846,091.
There are now 7,050 producing oil wells and 214 producing gas wells on lands of the Five Civilized Tribes.
The gross production of oil from lands of these Indians for the year was 13,414,657 barrels.
There are 8,804 oil and gas leases in force covering more than 788,000 acres belonging to Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes, 70 coal and asphalt leases on tribal lands of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations and 74 such leases on allotted lands.
On December 7, 1926, the regulations were amended to provide that oil and gas leases on lands of the Five Civilized Tribes shall be advertised and sold through competitive bidding to the highest responsible bidder.
There were 411 producing oil wells and 49 gas wells drilled on the Osage Reservation during the year.
There are now 9,887 producing oil wells and 776 producing gas wells within this reservation.
There were 219 new leases approved during the year, for which the Indians received in bonus payments the sum of $3,953,000.
The rental and royalty income for the year was $10,527,296.
The gross production of oil within the Osage reservation for the year was 25,884,734 barrels, while the gross production from all Indian oil and gas leases was approximately 41,000,000 barrels.
The Indians of tribes other than the Osages and Five Civilized Tribes received a revenue for the year from oil and gas leases of more than $1,200,000.
Within the Navajo treaty reservation, N. Mex., 7 producing oil wells were drilled, making a total of 29 wells now producing there and yielding a gross oil production more than double that of the prior year or 860,208 barrels.
A small producing well has been reported within the Ute Mountain Reservation in southwestern Colorado, the first indication of oil there.
By act of Congress approved March 3, 1927, unallotted lands, within Executive order Indian reservations, may be leased under the provisions of the act of May 29, 1924.
Section 5 of the former act provides for the issuance of prospecting permits, and about 200 applications for permits have been filed pursuant to regulations approved March 15, 1927.
There are approximately 16,400 acres of Quapaw Indian restricted allotted land in Oklahoma, the leasing of which for lead and zinc mining purposes is governed by the provisions of section 26 of the act of Congress approved March 3, 1921, and departmental regulations thereunder.
At the present time there are 53 departmental lead and zinc mining leases in force covering, in the aggregate, 7,024 acres.
Within this leased area are also 55 subleases covering 2,657 acres.
During the fiscal year there were produced from the mines within the restricted land 236,512 tons of lead and zinc concentrates which sold for the aggregate sum of $14,131,113.
The royalties therefrom totaled $1,307,114, which amount was equivalent to approximately 914 per cent of the gross proceeds of the sales.
The royalties received were for the benefit of 50 Quapaw allottees or their heirs according to their respective interests therein.
There are five Quapaws whose royalty income each for the year totaled more than $80,000.
In one case the royalty amounted to $188,296.
Reports received indicate that the aggregate production of concentrates, the aggregate proceeds of the sales, and the total amount of royalties, were somewhat less than during the prior year.
The mines on the Quapaw restricted land were reported to have produced during the year approximately 6 per cent of the lead and 22 per cent of the zinc output from ore mined in the United States during that period.
Through cooperative arrangement with the Geological Survey, the producing mines are visited periodically and inspections are made to insure strict compliance with the terms of the leases and that the mills and mines are being efficiently operated to conserve the interests of the Indian owners of the land.
Technical data and other valuable information have been obtained relating to mineral development, mining operations, and improvements on the Quapaw restricted lands, which have been of material aid to the Indian Office in determining the terms and conditions upon which the leases should be made and the requirements for proper mining development of the land.
Although there were crop failures on several reservations, the Indians generally have progressed in agriculture during the year; and, while definite figures are not available, preliminary reports indicate a substantial increase in the number of Indians farming and the total acreage cultivated, largely through the stimulus of the industrial programs mentioned in the last report, which have now been introduced within 55 reservations.
The five-year program involves definite objectives for each year and functions through organizations of the men known as "chapters," with women's "auxiliaries" in each district.
There were 306 chapters with 5,219 members and 90 auxiliaries with 1,217 members, besides a considerable number of Indians affiliated with irrigation and improvement societies.
Industrial surveys involving a canvass of the reservation to gather statistics as to the condition, resources, and needs of each family, were made within 85 reservations.
They form the basis of the five-year program, which was originally adopted for the reservation as a whole but is gradually progressing toward a separate program for each family, adapted to and contributing toward the general program for the reservation.
The construction of improved homes for Indians is a feature of the five-year program.
They have been provided as rapidly as the Indians have evinced a desire for them and whenever funds have been available.
Detailed plans and specifications of several types of suitable homes were sent to the reservations during the year with a circular letter designed to stimulate interest in home building.