To the Congress of the United States: No Congress of the United States ever assembled, on surveying the state of the Union, has met with a more pleasing prospect than that which appears at the present time.
In the domestic field there is tranquility and contentment, harmonious relations between management and wage earner, freedom from industrial strife, and the highest record of years of prosperity.
In the foreign field there is peace, the good will which comes from mutual understanding, and the knowledge that the problems which a short time ago appeared so ominous are yielding to the touch of manifest friendship.
The great wealth created by our enterprise and industry, and saved by our economy, has had the widest distribution among our own people, and has gone out in a steady stream to serve the charity and the business of the world.
The requirements of existence have passed beyond the standard of necessity into the region of luxury.
Enlarging production is consumed by an increasing demand at home and an expanding commerce abroad.
The country can regard the present with satisfaction and anticipate the future with optimism.
The main source of these unexampled blessings lies in the integrity and character of the American people.
They have had great faith, which they have supplemented with mighty works.
They have been able to put trust in each other and trust in their Government.
Their candor in dealing with foreign governments has commanded respect and confidence.
Yet these remarkable powers would have been exerted almost in vain without the constant cooperation and careful administration of the Federal Government.
We have been coming into a period which may be fairly characterized as a conservation of our national resources.
Wastefulness in public business and private enterprise has been displaced by constructive economy.
This has been accomplished by bringing our domestic and foreign relations more and more under a reign of law.
A rule of force has been giving way to a rule of reason.
We have substituted for the vicious circle of increasing expenditures, increasing tax rates, and diminishing profits the charmed circle of diminishing expenditures, diminishing tax rates, and increasing profits.
Four times we have made a drastic revision of our internal revenue system, abolishing many taxes and substantially reducing almost all others.
Each time the resulting stimulation to business has so increased taxable incomes and profits that a surplus has been produced.
One-third of the national debt has been paid, while much of the other two-thirds has been refunded at lower rates, and these savings of interest and constant economies have enabled us to repeat the satisfying process of more tax reductions.
Under this sound and healthful encouragement the national income has increased nearly 50 per cent, until it is estimated to stand well over $90,000,000,000.
It has been a method which has performed the seeming miracle of leaving a much greater percentage of earnings in the hands of the taxpayers 'with scarcely any diminution of the Government revenue.
That is constructive economy in the highest degree.
It is the corner stone of prosperity.
It should not fail to be continued.
This action began by the application of economy to public expenditure.
If it is to be permanent, it must be made so by the repeated application of economy.
There is no surplus on which to base further tax revision at this time.
Last June the estimates showed a threatened deficit for the current fiscal year of $94,000,000.
Under my direction the departments began saving all they could out of their present appropriations.
The last tax reduction brought 'an encouraging improvement in business, beginning early in October, which will also increase our revenue.
The combination of economy and good times now indicates a surplus of about $37,000,000.
This is a margin of less than I percent on out, expenditures and makes it obvious that the Treasury is in no condition to undertake increases in expenditures to be made before June 30.
It is necessary therefore during the present session to refrain from new appropriations for immediate outlay, or if such are absolutely required to provide for them by new revenue; otherwise, we shall reach the end of the year with the unthinkable result of an unbalanced budget.
For the first time during my term of office we face that contingency.
I am certain that the Congress would not pass and I should not feel warranted in approving legislation which would involve us in that financial disgrace.
On the whole the finances of the Government are most satisfactory.
Last year the national debt was reduced about $906,000,000.
The refunding and retirement of the second and third Liberty loans have just been brought to a successful conclusion, which will save about $75,000,0W a year in interest.
The unpaid balance has been arranged in maturities convenient for carrying out our permanent debt-paying Program.
The enormous savings made have not been at the expense of any legitimate public need.
The Government plant has been kept up and many improvements are tinder way, while its service is fully manned and the general efficiency of operation has increased.
We have been enabled to undertake many new enterprises.
Among these are the adjusted compensation of the veterans of the World War, which is costing us $112,000,000 a year; amortizing our liability to the civil service retirement funds, $20,000,000; increase of expenditures for rivers and harbors including flood control, $43,000,000; public buildings, $47,000,000.
In 1928 we spent $50,000,000 in the adjustment of war claims and alien property.
These are examples of a large list of items.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
When we turn from our domestic affairs to our foreign relations, we likewise perceive peace and progress.
The Sixth International Conference of American States was held at Havana last winter.
It contributed to a better understanding and cooperation among the nations'.
Eleven important conventions were signed and 71 resolutions passed.
Pursuant to the plan then adopted, this Government has invited the other 20 nations of this hemisphere to it conference on conciliation and arbitration, which meets in Washington on December 10.
All the nations have accepted and the expectation is justified that important progress will be made in methods for resolving international differences by means of arbitration.
During the year we have signed 11 new arbitration treaties, and 22 more are tinder negotiation.
NICARAGUA When a destructive and bloody revolution lately broke out in Nicaragua, at the earnest and repeated entreaties of its Government I dispatched our Marine forces there to protect the lives and interests of our citizens.
To compose the contending parties, I sent there Col. Henry L. Stimson, former Secretary of War and now Governor General of the Philippine Islands, who secured an agreement that warfare should cease, a national election should be held and peace should be restored.
Both parties conscientiously carried out this agreement, with the exception of a few bandits who later mostly surrendered or left the country.
President Diaz appointed Brig. Gen. Frank R. McCoy, United States Army, president of the election board, which included also one member of each political party.
A free and fair election has been held and has worked out so successfully that both parties have joined in requesting like cooperation from this country at the election four years hence, to which I have refrained from making any commitments, although our country must be gratified at such an exhibition of success and appreciation Nicaragua is regaining its prosperity and has taken a long step in the direction of peaceful self-government.
TACNA-ARICA The long-standing differences between Chile and Peru have been sufficiently composed so that diplomatic relations have been resumed by the exchange of ambassadors.
Negotiations are hopefully proceeding as this is written for the final adjustment of the differences over their disputed territory.
MEXICO Our relations with Mexico are on a more satisfactory basis than at any time since their revolution.
Many misunderstandings have been resolved and the most frank and friendly negotiations promise a final adjustment of all unsettled questions.
It is exceedingly gratifying that Ambassador Morrow has been able to bring our two neighboring countries, which have so many interests in common, to a position of confidence in each other and of respect for mutual sovereign rights.
CHINA The situation in China which a few months ago was so threatening as to call for the dispatch of a large additional force has, been much composed.
The Nationalist Government has established itself over the country and promulgated a new organic law announcing a program intended to promote the political and economic welfare of the people.
We have recognized this Government, encouraged its progress, and have negotiated a treaty restoring to China complete tariff autonomy and guaranteeing our citizens against discriminations.
Our trade in that quarter is increasing and our forces are being reduced.
GREEK AND AUSTRIAN DEBTS Pending before the Congress is a recommendation for the settlement of the Greek debt and the Austrian debt.
both of these are comparatively small and our country can afford to be generous.
The rehabilitation of these countries await& their settlement.
There would also be advantages to our trade.
We could scarcely afford to be the only nation that refuses the relief which Austria seeks.
The Congress has already granted Austria a long-time moratorium, which it is understood will be waived and immediate payments begun on her debt on the same basis which we have extended to other countries.
PEACE TREATY One of the most important treaties ever laid before the Senate of the United States will be that which the 15 nations recently signed at Paris, and to which 44 other nations have declared their intention to adhere, renouncing war as a national policy and agreeing to resort only to peaceful means for the adjustment of international differences.
It is the most solemn declaration against war, the most positive adherence to peace, that it is possible' for sovereign nations to make.
It does not supersede our inalienable sovereign right and duty of national defense or undertake to commit us before the event to any mode of action which the Congress might decide to be wise.
it ever the treaty should be broken.
But it is a new standard in the world around which can rally the informed and enlightened opinion of nations to prevent their governments from being forced into hostile action by the temporary outbreak of international animosities.
The observance of this covenant, so simple and so straightforward, promises more for the peace of the world than any other agreement ever negotiated among the nations.
NATIONAL DEFENSE The first duty of our Government to its own citizens and foreigners within its borders is the preservation of order.
Unless and until that duty is met a government is not even eligible for recognition among the family of nations.
The advancement of world civilization likewise is dependent upon that order among the people of different countries which we term peace.
To insure our citizens against the infringement of their legal rights at home and abroad, to preserve order, liberty, and peace by making the law supreme, we have an Army and a Navy.
Both of these are organized for defensive purposes.
Our Army could not be much reduced, but does not need to be increased.
Such new housing and repairs as are necessary are tinder way and the 6-year program in aviation is being put into effect in both branches of our service.
Our Navy, according to generally accepted standards, is deficient in cruisers.
We have 10 comparatively new vessels, 22 that are old, and 8 to be built.
It is evident that renewals and replacements must be provided.
This matter was thoroughly canvassed at the last session of the Congress and does not need restatement.
The bill before the Senate with the elimination of the time clause should be passed.
We have no intention of competing with any other country.
This building program is for necessary replacements and to meet our needs for defense.
The cost of national defense is stupendous.
It has increased $118,000,000 in the past four years.
The estimated expenditure for 1930 is $668,000,000.
While this is made up of many items it is, after all, mostly dependent upon numbers.
Our defensive needs do not can for any increase in the number of men in the Army or the Navy.
We have reached the limit of what we ought to expend for that purpose.
I wish to repeat again for the benefit of the timid and the suspicious that this country is neither militaristic nor imperialistic.
Many people at home and abroad, who constantly make this charge, are the same ones who are even more solicitous to have us extend assistance to foreign countries.
When such assistance is granted, the inevitable result is that we have foreign interests.
For us to refuse the customary support and protection of such interests would be in derogation of the sovereignty of this Nation.
Our largest foreign interests are in the British Empire, France, and Italy.
Because we are constantly solicitous for those interests, I doubt if anyone would suppose that those countries feel we harbor toward them any militaristic or imperialistic design.
As for smaller countries, we certainly do not want any of them.
We are more anxious than they are to have their sovereignty respected.
Our entire influence is in behalf of their independence.
Cuba stands as a witness to our adherence to this principle.
The position of this Government relative to the limitation of armaments, the results already secured, and the developments up to the present time are so well known to the Congress that they do not require any restatement.
VETERANS The magnitude of our present system of veterans' relief is without precedent, and the results have been far-reaching.
For years a service pension has been granted to the Grand Army and lately to the survivors of the Spanish-American War.
At the time we entered the World War however, Congress departed from the usual pension system followed by our Gove2rnment.
Eleven years have elapsed since our laws were first enacted, initiating a system of compensation, rehabilitation, hospitalization, and insurance for the disabled of the World War and their dependents.
The administration 'of all the laws concerning relief has been a difficult task, but it can safely be stated that these measures have omitted nothing in their desire to deal generously and humanely. We should continue to foster this system and provide all the facilities necessary for adequate care. It is the conception of our Government that the pension roll is an honor roll. It should include all those who are justly entitled to its benefits, but exclude all others. Annual expenditures for all forms of veterans' relief now approximate $765,000,000, and are increasing from year to year.
It is doubtful if the peak of expenditures will be reached even under present legislation for sonic time yet to come.
