THE business of the department at the close of the fiscal year was practically current.
Owing to progressive decreases in the number of employees over a period of several years and to expansion of departmental activities, it was not possible to show a reduction in force as compared to the previous year.
The volume of business conducted by the department as a whole was greater, however, which was made possible only by improvement in methods and an increased output by the employees carried on the rolls.
The raise in the standard of pay provided by the Welch Act has resulted in a better satisfied personnel.
As hereinafter mentioned, there was a net increase in appropriations for the year, as compared to 1927, of $8,547,183.71.
It is gratifying to report that $4,365,021.06 of this amount was for the benefit of the American Indians.
During the year the General Land Office collected over six and a half million dollars, or three times the cost of administration.
The low price of oil during the year discouraged production on Government land, resulting in reduced receipts and consequently less royalty to the Government.
The total receipts under the mineral leasing act, including oil royalty, aggregated $4,677,277.16.
Income from other sources compared favorably with that of recent years.
The total area embraced in original public land entries allowed during the year was 3,726,421 acres, as compared with 3,594,838 acres for the previous year.
Filings were made to the number of 26,267 on public lands.
The surveying service accomplished the survey of 2,937,688 acres.
Examinations on the ground were made in more than 17,000 casos, 12,324 being reported favorably to claimants and 5,333 adversely.
As a result over 153,000 acres were restored to the public domain.
Three hundred and thirty-three hearings were held.
Civil suits were recommended to the Department of Justice in 64 cases.
Twenty-one indictments for violations of the statutes were secured, and a sum of over $38,000 was turned into the Treasury, nearly $27,000 of that amount being in settlement of timber trespasses.
During the year there were issued over 12,500 patents conveying title to nearly 3,000,000 acres; and over 4,400 permits to prospect for oil and gas, 83 coal prospecting permits, 85 potash permits, and 14 sodium permits.
The Bureau of Reclamation confined its construction activities during the year to projects already commenced under the 10-year program.
Considerable progress was made on the six dams under construction in California, Montana, Oregon, Utah, and Washington.
The irrigable area on Federal projects and of adjacent land served with Federal storage water under Warren Act or other water service contracts during the 1927 season was 3,439,860 acres, an increase of 266,290 acres over the previous year.
The total value of crops in 1927 on lands supplied with water from Federal works was $133,207,- 210, an increase of $23,087,550 over 1926.
Collections from project water users showed an increase of $1,038,928.20 in 1928 over the previous year.
The Bureau of Pensions in the last fiscal year adjudicated 147,620 pension claims, a decrease over the previous year of 13,136 claims.
The act of May 23, 1928, automatically increased the pensions of 103,000 Civil War widows who were 75 years of age or over from $30 to $40 per month.
In order to determine what pensioners were entitled to this increase it was necessary to withdraw from the files and examine approximately 171,000 cases.
There was a net reduction of 53 in the number of employees in the bureau.
This was effected by permitting vacancies to lapse.
The report of the Institute for Government Research, which made perhaps the most comprehensive survey of Indian affairs ever undertaken, was received near the close of the fiscal year and is now being studied by the department.
An engineering survey of the principal irrigation projects of the Indians was made during the year and the comprehensive report and recommendations submitted are having the attention of the officers of the department.
An appropriation of $25,000 for the employment of graduates of agricultural colleges, scientifically trained and qualified, to supervise the agricultural activities of the Indians will partially fill a long-felt need in the Indian Service.
The various State colleges and universities of the Western States cooperated in working out the problems of Indian agriculture and stock raising.
Farmers' short courses were held during the fall and winter of 1927-28, faculties volunteering their services and officials tendering the free use of buildings and equipment.
There has been an increase in the enrollment of Indians in the junior high and senior high school years, the increase in 1928 over the prior year being 428 in the former and 231 in the latter.
The reorganization of the Indian medical service, which was put into effect in 1926, resulted in better coordination of health activities.
Cooperative arrangements have been made with other Federal health agencies; also with those which are State, local, and voluntary.
An authorization of an appropriation of $1,200,000 has been obtained to buy lands for the large number of Navajo Indians in New Mexico and Arizona scattered over the public domain.
The Coolidge Dam, on the Gila River in Arizona, under construction at an estimated cost of $5,850,000, including hydroelectric power development, to impound waters for adequate irrigation facilities for the Pima Indians, will be completed in the immediate future.
By an agreement with the Salt River Valley Water Users'Association and the Paradise-Verde power and irrigation district, provision is made to insure an adequate water supply for the Pima Indians on the Salt River Reservation.
This will satisfy a need of many years.
The Bureau of Education has completed the survey of negro colleges and universities, and the report is now issuing from the Government Printing Office.
The survey of land-grant colleges will be completed during 1930.
The bureau cooperated during the year with the Bureau of Naturalization in the formulation of plans for preparing aliens for citizenship, with the Department of Justice in devising an educational program for Federal prisons and reformatories, and with the Department of Commerce in outlining a proposed survey of certain occupations related to merchandising.
Preliminary steps have been taken for a survey of Indian schools.
The Commissioner of Education called and held important conferences on various phases of rural education, rural teacher preparation, supervision in city school systens, platoon schools, and home economics.
The biennial statistics of education were brought more nearly to date, practically all the 1926 statistics being available in 1927.
The National Park Service during the year served 3,026,273 visitors to national parks and monuments, an increase of 228,433 persons over the previous high record of 1927.
A new national park, Bryce Canyon, was established on September 15, 1928, under authority of the acts of Congress approved June 7, 1924, and February 25, 1928, and was dedicated on September 16, 1928.
An agreement was reached between the Secretaries of War and Interior whereby recommendation was made to Congress for the transfer from the jurisdiction of the War Department to that of the Interior Department of 10 national military and other parks and 9 national monuments to be known as national historical parks.
A bill authorizing this transfer was passed by the Senate but has not yet been acted upon by the House of Representatives.
Funds were donated for study and report on educational possibilities of the national park system, as well as for construction of museums in the Yellowstone Park.
Archeological investigations were carried on in national parks and monuments containing prehistoric structures.
Under the park service road budget 272 miles of new highways have been completed and 261 miles are now under construction.
Revenues received from the national parks and monuments in 1928 amounted to $808,255.81, an increase of $104,406.21 over the 1927 revenues.
In the Geological Survey steady progress was made in the task of making a topographic map of the entire country; this work is being pursued chiefly in cooperation with the States, which contribute about half the cost.
A new stereoscopic apparatus for making contour maps from overlapping photographs was purchased and is expected to revolutionize topographic mapping in mountainous countries.
Geologic investigations of the year were mainly continuations of studies of the metalliferous resources and the oil and coal fields of the Western and Southwestern States, and general studies of other mineral resources and of the physiography and geologic history of the entire country.
Continued search for potash has proved the presence of deposits large enough to be of possible economic interest at two localities in Texas and at one locality in New Mexico.
Volcanologic studies, already under way at stations in Hawaii and Alaska, have been extended on a small scale to California.
Five geologic and topographic exploring and mapping projects were under way in Alaska during the summer of 1928.
The transportation by airplane of survey men and supplies into an area difficult of access demonstrated the practicability of thus lengthening the field season and facilitating exploratory work.
The number of stream-gaging stations was increased from 1,749 to 1,830, and seven new groundwater investigations were started.
Cooperation was begun with the State Department in obtaining systematic records of rivers which flow across or along the Canadian and Mexican boundaries and as to which international questions are pending or are imminent.
A report was issued on power capacity and production in the United States, presenting a statistical view of the growth of the power industry.
Supervisory work under the mineral leasing laws on lands containing publicly owned mineral deposits was extended to 4,631 new leases, licenses, and prospecting permits issued during the year.
The population of the Territory of Hawaii increased during the year by 15,347.
The alien population, excluding the Filipinos, has decreased by 2,205; the citizen population has increased by 10,658: A high standard of health and prosperity has continued to prevail in the islands.
Agriculture has prospered.
A notable feature of the sugar industry is the steadily increased per acre production.
Pineapple producers have found a good market for large quantities of their canned output.
The coffee industry is prospering, the area planted having increased during the year.
Total bank deposits amounted to $80,210,063.69, of which $31,278,434.34 are in savings banks, an increase of savings deposits of $4,176,214.46.
The year 1928 marks the celebration of the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the discovery of the Hawaiian Islands by Capt. James Cook.
The industrial conditions and the economic situation in Alaska were in general as satisfactory as could be expected, considering the decline in the catch of salmon.
Labor was well employed.
There were no widespread epidemics.
The balance in the Territorial treasury at the close of business December 31, 1927, was $772,058.59, the largest closing balance for any year within the decade.
Customs reports disclosed a decrease in shipments from Alaska to the United States and an increase in the value of shipments to the Territory.
The outlook for an early development of the pulp and paper industry, it is stated, has never been more encouraging.
Large crews of timber cruisers are in the field estimating available timber, engineers are studying water power for the purpose of submitting plans for its development, and the early construction of hydroelectric units is anticipated.
It is estimated that within the next four years the manufacture of paper will take its place as one of the major industries of the Territory.
For the first time in many years the production of coal in the Territory greatly exceeded the importation of this commodity from foreign sources.
The total domestic consumption was 166,000 tons, of which 104,300 tons, valued at $548,000, were mined in Alaska.
The Alaska Railroad management continued its work of completion and improvement during the year.
Pursuant to the regular program, gravel fills were substituted for wooden bridges and trestles wherever possible.
Wherever it has been necessary to leave openings for the passage of streams or flood waters, concrete culverts or steel bridges on concrete piers have been installed, so maintaining the roadway as to reduce maintenance in the future.
At many points the track has been raised for better drainage facilities.
No new equipment was purchased during the year.
In road operations a persistent effort was made to reduce expenses and to increase revenues with the result that.
There was an increase of $118,051.76 in operating revenues.
The number of patients at St. Elizabeths Hospital increased by 211 during the past fiscal year.
This is a greater increase than for many years.
During the year an appropriation of $875,000 was authorized for a new medical and surgical hospital building.
The plans for this building are well under way and it is hoped that construction will begin in the spring.
This will provide about 200 additional beds and will make available the most modern facilities for the care of physical illness.
The new building will form the nucleus of the medical center of the institution, the future building program contemplating new receiving buildings immediately adjoining for both sexes.
Progress is noted in the work of the training school, the occupational therapy department, the Red Cross and the social service department, while the administrative department reports a prosperous year throughout.
Farm and garden products have increased in quantity and value, as has the output of the various related industrial establishments.
The power, heating, and lighting plant has been remodeled and newly equipped.
Howard University had an enroļlment of 2,563 students, the largest in its history.
The new laboratory building for medicine was ready for occupancy on October 1, 1927.
Following a thorough survey of the law school by Mr. H. C. Horack, secretary of the American Association of Law Schools, the trustees voted to inaugurate a 3-year full-time day school and a 4-year part-time evening school under conditions acceptable to that association.
The law school and departments of social science received gifts aggregating $30,000 from the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial for improvement of library facilities.
Freedmen's Hospital received for treatment 29,501 patients during the year, the number exceeding that of the preceding fiscal year by 4,842.
Two thousand three hundred and sixty-one surgical operations were performed, the majority being of a major nature.
In the obstetrical department 390 births occurred, 64 more than last year.
The hospital admitted 1,005 pay patients and 501 others were treated in the dental department.
While there was increased activity in all departments, that in the X ray and pathological exceeded that of any previous year.
These laboratories provided an abundance of clinical material for students of Howard University Medical College.
Twenty-five internes and two externes were trained in all the branches of medicine.
Seventy student nurses received a full course of instruction and two graduate nurses were given special courses in the pathological laboratory.
An electrocardiograph was installed for diagnosis.
The appropriations for the fiscal year 1928, including deficiency appropriations, and deducting the $37,999,998.50 advanced for payment of pensions in 1927, aggregated $299,918,985.55, an increase of $8,547,183.71 over the fiscal year 1927.
The principal items entering into this increase were $4,365,021.06 for the Bureau of Indian Affairs, $4,720,440 for the Bureau of Reclamation, and $955,765 for the National Park Service.
These increases were offset in part by decreases of $1,104,997 for the Bureau of Pensions and $374,708 for the Territories of Alaska and Hawaii.
The unexpended balances reverting to the Treasury from appropriations for the fiscal year 1928 amounted to $1,415,544.57, as compared to $1,966,245.07 for the fiscal year 1927.
The receipts of the department from all sources for the fiscal year 1928 amounted to $36,087,975.72, .
This decrease was due chiefly to the falling off in receipts under the mineral leasing act and in proceeds from sales of leases of Indian lands and timber.
At the close of the fiscal year 1927 there were 11,525 permanent employees on the rolls in Washington and the field; at the close of the fiscal year 1928 there were 11,775.
The monthly average number of temporary employees was 3,546, as compared with 2,691 for the previous year.
The turnover for the permanent force in Washington was 59 per cent, as compared with 55 per cent for last year.
The appropriations and allotments for salaries of employees for the year were $18,065,654.67; the amount spent was $17,523,129.17, a net saving of $542,525.50, or 3 per cent of the appropriations and allotments.
The so-called Welch Act, approved May 28, 1928, providing for horizontal increases of Government salaries, became effective July 1, 1928.
The result was to increase the average of the annual salaries in this department from $2,110.81 to $2,307.40.
The cost of the act to this department on an annual basis for the fiscal year 1929 is estimated at $1,235,893.26.
On June 15, 1928, there were 2,080 employees in Washington, exclusive of St. Elizabeth's and Freedmen's Hospitals.
Of that number, 1,433 received less than the average salaries of their respective grades, 387 more, and 260 were receiving the average salaries.
On July 1, after the Welch Act became effective, the number receiving less than the average was 1,700; above average, 392; receiving average salaries, 2.
It is apparent that the effect of the Welch Act was to increase the numbers of those below and above average and to decrease very materially the number who receive the average salaries of their respective grades.
This is because the act, while raising the pay standard, at the same time raised the authorized grade averages, and to the fact that in only four grades do the mathematical averages now correspond to any of the rates within the grades.
Promotions were approved during the year to the amount of $86,120 on an annual salary basis.
These promotions were based on efficiency records of employees, and, as in previous years, funds became available from lapsed salaries, with no direct appropriation for promotions by Congress.
Legal questions arising in the administration of the department cover a wide range and involve matters relating to soldiers'pensions, public lands, Indian affairs, national parks, reclamation projects, and miscellaneous matters.
Not all the questions presented are finally settled in the department, as many result in prolonged litigation in Federal and State courts.
While most of the court work is handled by the Department of Justice, the legal force of this department actively cooperates with the Justice officials in the conduct of Interior litigation.
The recent requirement that all matters arising in the bureaus of the department and involving questions of law shall be routed through the office of the solicitor, has secured uniformity in rulings.
The wisdom of this policy is reflected in court decisions upholding the department and thereby safeguarding the interests of the Government.
During the year 47,328 cases passed through the solicitor's office, an increase of 10,735 over the preceding year.
A classification of these cases is published in the appendix of this report.
Litigation affecting the department and brought in the courts of the District of Columbia is handled by the office of the solicitor.
During the year the Supreme Court of the District has handed down opinions in 22 such cases, in 14 of which no appeals have been taken.
Five cases were finally disposed of by the District Court of Appeals, in each of which the decision upheld the department.
There are 15 cases now pending in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia and 6 in the court of appeals.
Disposition of a large area of oil shale lands is the subject of pending litigation, involving the construction of a statute.
The department has denied the right of applicants to acquire title to these lands, and they have instituted suit to test that ruling.
This case is now before the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia on appeal from a decision of the Supreme Court of the District sustaining the action of the department.
A series of cases of a similar nature and involving valuable coal lands has been disposed of by a final decision of the Supreme Court of the United States handed down during the year.
The court upheld the position of the department denying the right of the applicants to a patent.
All attempts to reverse the decisions of the department in adjustments of claims, aggregating millions of dollars, under the so-called "war minerals relief act"so far have been unsuccessful.
The administration of the Bureau of Indian Affairs of this department touches a variety of human activities.
On behalf of about 350,000 Indians, it administers educational institutions and sanatoria, purchases all kinds of articles and supplies, and employs a wide range of personal service, including that of laborers, farmers, teachers, nurses, physicians, and lawyers.
It erects and maintains roads, bridges, buildings, and irrigation projects.
Its forestry service has custody of some of the country's most valuable timber reserves.
The bureau buys and sells lands.
As trustee for Indians owning beneficial interests in real and personal property, it supervises individual and tribal values aggregating $1,700,000,000.
Legal questions, too, are involved in much of the bureau's current work.
Direction and supervision of Indians in industry, in agriculture and stock raising, and in other pursuits are influential factors in the efforts of the bureau to assimilate Indians with our population and to help them to economic independence.
In furtherance of such purpose, the bureau has constructed schoolhouses and has employed teachers.
Wherever conditions permit, Indian children are placed in public schools, local districts being reimbursed for tuition.
Last year there were about 35,000 Indians in public schools, but the total appropriation of $350,000 for tuition was soon exhausted and many applications were refused.
An appropriation of $375,000 was secured for the current year, but that fund is already nearly exhausted.
No tuition is paid for children of less than one-fourth Indian blood, nor for those of families whose taxable holdings within the district exceed their nontaxable holdings.
It has been found that attendance of Indian children in public schools near their homes benefits both children and their families.
Incidentally, it effects a saving of public funds, as many of the children for whom tuition is paid otherwise would be placed in Government boarding schools at Government expense.
However, the segregation on reservation3 of Indian children during their earlier years, the nomadic life of their parents and of a large proportion of the population, and the frequent controversies and complications as to property rights make it impossible for approximately one-half the Indian children to be provided with publicschool facilities.
Consequently, the Indian Service now maintains for these children 204 schools, with a capacity of 26,000 pupils, and about 5,000 pupils attend mission schools supported by religious denominations.
The appropriation last year for Indian education, exclusive of public-school tuition, was $5,923,000.
During the last six years Congress has increased appropriations in support of Indian education by $2,898,825, which has made it possible to improve school buildings, to increase tbe number of grades, to raise the standard of teaching, and to place more children in school.
But there is opportunity for greater advancement in methods of Indian education and for improvement of the facilities provided for children of school age.
Until recently the courses offered Indians were all of elementary grades.
No complete high-school courses were taught for them until 1921, and then at only one school.
In 1925, three such courses were added; one was added in 1926 and a fifth in 1927.
The increase during the last three years in the number of pupils—junior and senior grades—has been by 1,178 in the former and by 526 in the latter.
There are now only six institutions maintained by the Federal Government where Indians may receive a highschool education.
Elementary and junior high-school courses are also taught in these institutions, the senior high-school grades constituting only one department.
There is not an Indian school in the United States that is strictly a high school.
Contrast these conditions with the educational advantages offered the white population.
During the last decade high-school enrollment in the United States has increased from 1,600,000 to 4,000,000.
There are enrolled in colleges, universities, and other institutions of higher learning nearly a million young men and women, and untold thousands of youths and adults attend night and continuation schools.
The enrollment in the public high schools in the United States is approximately 1 to every 6 pupils of school age, while among Indians it is only 1 to every 20.
The aggregate number of Indians in institutions of higher learning or who are pursuing extension courses is negligible.
The yearly allotments for the support of Indian schools vary from $230 to $260 for each student, or from $4.73 to $5 per week.
The increase in these allotments in the last 10 years ranged from only 10 to 20 per cent.
Let this per capita cost be compared with the following statistics showing the increase in the weekly cost per student, for example, in Wisconsin State institutions, and note that in Wisconsin during the last 10 years it has almost doubled.
Shortage of funds for the support of Indian schools makes it impossible to equip them adequately.
Expenditures for such essentials as textbooks, library books, maps, miscellaneous classroom supplies and equipment, furniture for dormitories, machinery for shop and farm are so limited as to decrease efficiency.
Paucity of textbooks may be the most serious handicap, particularly since no school bas an ample supply of supplemental texts by other authors.
Very few schools have libraries, and it is exceptional for a school to make annual purchases of library books.
Dormitory rooms are frequently without chairs.
Laundry machinery in many cases is out of date, inefficient, and more or less dangerous.
Many of the quarters for teachers are not comfortably furnished.
During the year the Institute for Government Research, a nongovernmental agency, completed an independent survey of the economic and social conditions of the Indians.
The department invited the institute to make the survey, which was begun in 1926.
The institute's report was transmitted to the Secretary of the Interior on February 21, 1928.
This was the most thorough and comprehensive survey of Indian affairs ever undertaken.
The report, which is entitled"The Problem of Indian Administration,"comprises 872 pages.
It contains many constructive suggestions and recommendations for the betterment of all branches of the service.
The officers of the department have been studying it intensively, and some of the recommendations have already been incorporated in the Indian program.
The survey staff finds itself obliged to say frankly and unequivocally that the provisions for the care of the Indian children in boarding schools are grossly inadequate.
The diet is deficient in quality, quantity, and variety.
The great protective foods are milk and fruit and vegetables, particularly fresh green vegetables.
The diet of the Indian children in boarding schools is generally notably lacking in these protective foods.
The boarding schools are overcrowded materially beyond their capacities.
The medical service rendered the boarding-school children is not up to a reasonable standard.
The medical attention given children in day schools maintained by the Government is also below a reasonable standard.
The boarding schools are supported in part by the labor of students.
The service is notably weak in personnel trained and experienced in educational work with families and communities.
There is in connection with Indian education a problem to which especial attention is being devoted by the department, viz, the welfare of the Indians after they leave school.
The purpose of the department is to develop a constructive plan by which, for a limited time, the Government can supervise them, so that they may become established and adjusted to their white neighbors.
Experience has demonstrated that it is futile to try to make all Indians farmers and stock raisers.
Many will not interest themselves in those occupations.
It has been believed that the young men and young women who have finished their schooling, perhaps have learned trades and prefer not to return to their reservations, should be encouraged to seek employment elsewhere.
Thus many of them have formed lucrative connections in business.
Education of such a primitive people in the conservation and management of their resources is naturally a slow process.
Even to-day superstition causes Indian homes to be abandoned because an Indian or Indians have died in them.
Startling instances of human suffering in attempts to appease the gods frequently come to notice.
The present Secretary of the Interior recently has visited reservations in Montana, Arizona, and New Mexico, where he inspected the Indian school system—day and boarding—and studied the problem of vocational guidance.
For a number of years many Indians, particularly the Apaches, have been employed in Arizona copper mines, but there has been no definite plan for guiding them and little thought has been given to conserving their earnings.
It is reported that last year the Apaches on the San Carlos Reservation earned about $400,000 in mines, on roads, and in the fields, but at the year's end they had no savings.
In contrast, the achievements of a group of 120 Indian boys from three schools in New Mexico, who were employed in the sugar-beet fields of Colorado, under close supervision, may be cited.
Their earnings aggregated $17,250 for the summer, and their savings amounted to $10,180, which they took back to their schools for their own uses.
The wide distribution of the Indians adds to the difficulties of administration.
With 200 tribes scattered over 26 States, the problem is complicated not only by distance, but by climate, environment, and tribal customs.
The disintegration of tribes and the division of tribal lands among individual families further complicate.
Where, formerly, Indians were considered collectively, they now more and more require consideration individually.
It will be recalled that the Fort Belknap Reservation in Montana comprised over 600,000 acres of land, and the Indians at one time had a tribal or communal interest in the total area.
This interest was divided in 1925 by approval of allotments to individuals, which separated the former tribal holding into 1,171 parcels.
Where previously the business of the reservation was conducted by the bureau as one unit, now each parcel and its owner must receive attention: individual allotments may be leased or sold; heirs must be discovered and their rights adjudicated; allotments may be bartered and exchanged between the Indian owners; patents in fee may issue; taxes are an ever present concern; fraudulent purchases from Indians of their trust lands are attempted and frequently with success;individual complaints of all kinds constantly present themselves.
The issuance of trust patents to individual Indians entails the maximum of care and responsibility for the bureau—until the.
Indians shall have sold their allotments.
Then fee patents issue to the new owners, usually whites.
There are many instances of Indians alienating their lands and dissipating the proceeds, who, left on their own resources, have applied themselves to useful pursuits.
They have put to use knowledge and training of their school days with satisfactory results.
This applies especially to those Indians who had manual training in school and are equipped for employment in shops, garages, and like industrial plants.
Students of the problems of the Indian quite generally condemn the rationing system, which has encouraged idleness and has deprived the object of the Government's bounty of his independence and manly attributes.
It has stimulated the tendency to lease lands for inadequate rentals to enterprising whites, who permit the soil to be impoverished and the crude improvements to depreciate.
In an endeavor to correct such tendencies of the Indian, the bureau has been using a recent appropriation for the employment of six agricultural directors, technically trained as to soils, rotation of crops, breeding of livestock, etc.
It is proposed also to assign to each Indian reservation at least one such expert farmer, with duties similar to those of the so-called county agent in agricultural States.
Subject to the efficient execution of a definite program of improvement, it is believed that no better use can be made of tribal funds than the establishment of reimbursable appropriations through which members of the tribe can be assisted in farming, livestock raising, home building, and other industrial operations.
Such vocations will elevate the scale of living of the individuals directly benefited and through example react to the good of the whole tribe.
To June 30, 1928, some $1,542,968 of tribal money had been so used, all of which save $96,350 has been repaid.
This unpaid balance is secured by agreements.
The members of the survey staff wish me to say clearly in this letter that in almost every activity of the Indian Service they found wide variation between the best and the worst.
The best at times approaches the ideal; frequently the survey staff has been able to take as their standard for comparison the attainments of the Indian Service itself.
The worst often falls far below the normal.
It may be stated that in certain of the schools visited by thc present Secretary of the Interior instruction and recitations compared favorably with those to be heard in schools for white children.
The Bureau of Education of this department has been directed to cooperate with the Indian Service in an effort to improve the educational system of the Indians.
This is expected to result in a program conforming to modern methods among whites and yet providing a practical plan suitable to the Indians.
It seems clear that the traditional school system of the whites is not immediately applicable in its entirety to the needs of Indian children.
It is hoped that closer cooperation may be established between States having Indian populations and the Federal Government in dealing with questions of education, health, and law enforcement.
Probably States should ultimately assume complete responsibility for the Indians within their borders, but pending that time there is much to be done by the Federal service.
The department has recognized that general conditions, as outlined, are of long standing, that they can not be remedied in a brief period, and that unwieldy appropriations, if made, could not be wisely expended in a single year; and so it is recommended that there be regular and reasonable annual increases, which will enable the department to readjust its personnel and activities.
The Secrètary of the Interior was authorized by Congress on March 13, 1928, to execute an agreement with the Middle Rio Grande conservancy district in New Mexico on behalf of the Pueblo Indians.
The district, which is composed of white settlers in the Middle Rio Grande Valley, was formed under State law to provide irrigation, drainage, and flood control for approximately 132,000 acres of land.
Interspersed with the district lands are 23,000 acres belonging to six Indian pueblos.
These lands are not subject to the district law, nor to State and county taxation, the Indian being under the guardianship of the United States.
However, for a comprehensive and economical development of the district, it was considered necessary to include the Indian lands, and Congress authorized the department to make a contract with the district providing for an equitable share in cost of construction.
The entire program is estimated to cost $11,829,000.
The act contemplates that the Government shall advance the Indians'share in a sum not to exceed $1,593,311, to be repaid by cash from lessees, if and when received from such reclaimed Indian lands.
About 8,346 acres of Indian lands included in the proposed development are now somewhat indifferently cultivated by the Indians under irrigation works.
The water level is rising on this area, and unless drainage shall be provided considerable of the land ultimately will become water-logged and unfit for cultivation.
Some of the conditions to be incorporated in the agreement are specified by Congress.
The Secretary is to determine the total acreage of the Indian lands that should bear a share of the cost.
Only those lands susceptible of economical irrigation are to be taken into consideration.
The average cost per acre to the Indians for the included lands can not exceed $67.50.
The Indians shall have free use of the present cultivated areas (8,346 acres) without payment of operation and maintenance charges and this acreage will be free from any lien created by the legislation.
The Indians shall also have the privilege of using 4,000 acres of newly reclaimed lands without payment of rental charges, but these 4,000 acres are to bear their proportionate share of the operation and maintenance assessments.
The remaining 12,000 acres of Indian lands are to be leased, the rentals therefrom being applied if and as collected to reimburse the Government for its advancements for and on account of the costs and benefits apportioned against the present cultivated area.
The Indians are given a preference right to lease any part of the 12,000 acres, in which case they will be required to pay like rental as shall be paid by whites or others.
On August 6, 1928, a tentative agreement, prepared in the Department of the Interior, was signed by the officers of the Middle Rio Grande conservancy district and was returned to Washington for the signature of the Secretary of the Interior.
As persons declaring themselves interested on behalf of the Indians requested to be heard respecting the agreement before it should be signed, a hearing was accorded them and officers of the district, by the Secretary of the Interior in Washington on September 19.
The agreement signed by the district, and concerning which the hearing was held, fixed a maximum charge to the Indian lands concerned of·$67.50 for any acre.
In early October the Secretary of the Interior visited New Mexico and during two days personally inspected on foot and by automobile about 100 miles of the proposed district.
He met with the elected governors and Indian councils of four of the six Indian pueblos affected by the proposed development.
As many as 25 Indians attended some of these sessions.
At all the conferences the proposed development was discussed.
At Albuquerque hearings were given to those favoring and to those opposing the plans of the district.
Accompanying the Secretary were three engineers, representing the Department of the Interior.
Two of them have been in New Mexico studying the proposed development along the Rio Grande.
Further action on the agreement has been withheld pending receipt of their report as to prospective benefits to be derived by the Indians, and the share of the cost which should be paid by their lands.
There are 355,901 Indians in the United States.
They are numerous in 24 States.
Last year they earned through the sale of their blankets, baskets, pottery, beads, wood carving, embroidery, and paintings, $1,267,816.
Of this sum 74 per cent, or $944,863, was earned by the Indians of Arizona, Minnesota, and New Mexico.
There is wide interest among our people in these activities of the Indians; for the preservation and encouragement of Indian arts and crafts; and in the purchase of the articles they make.
In my visits to Indian reservations and schools in Arizona, New Mexico, and elsewhere I gave special attention to their handiwork.
Perhaps the Government could recognize these products in some official manner and thereby render a real service to those Indians now engaged in such crafts and to those who might be encouraged to interest themselves in them.
Field instructors from the Indian Service might enlist additional Indian producers.
The market for Indian handiwork at present is largely local, the bulk of the output being bought by tourists from dealers at the places of production.
The demand for articles of Indian craftsmanship in distant parts of the country is negligible, probably because potential buyers question the authenticity of the articles.
In the Indian country the prospective buyer feels assured of genuineness, and the Indian setting provides an atmosphere which encourages him.
To enlarge the market for Indian handiwork, the department is considering the advisability of adopting a trade-mark design which could be registered in the United States Patent Office.
The design would be attractive, suggesting craftsmanship of the North American Indian.
It would be in a form suitable for attachment to the various articles to be marked.
Use of the trade-mark would not be compulsory, but it would guarantee that the product was genuine.
A thorough distribution of the proposed trade-marks or labels could be accomplished by placing them with superintendents of Indian reservations and schools.
Those officials would issue them with proper safeguards to insure their legitimate use.
It would seem that some such plan need not interfere with established trade, and, with the cooperation of Indian traders and dealers generally, the distribution could be sufficiently wide that any Indian might readily obtain the trade-marks.
The department is mindful, too, of the benefits which might accrue to the Indians if some practical guaranty of the sanitary condition of such products were devised.
The whole subject is receiving careful consideration.
The Pueblo Lands Board, established by Congress in 1924, continued its investigation of the status of Pueblo Indian lands and water rights in New Mexico.
The board consists of the Attorney General, the Secretary of the Interior, and an appointee of the President, the two former acting through assistants.
The Secretary of the Interior inspected the offices and records of the board at Santa Fe, N. Mex., in October, 1928, advised with the members and visited some of the pueblos.
It is the duty of the Attorney General to bring suits to quiet title based on the reports of the board.
After court proceedings and appeals shall have been concluded, the Secretary of the Interior is to issue patents to successful claimants.
There are 20 pueblos within the scope of the investigations, each of them comprising from 13,000 to upward of 200,000 acres.
The board has completed the investigation of the pueblos of Taos, Picuris, Nambe, Tesuque, Santo Domingo, San Felipe, Santa Ana, Zia, Sandia, Isleta, and Jemez, and has filed its reports.
In these 11 pueblos, 2,310 claims, affecting 26,165.6 acres, were considered and passed upon; 577 claims, affecting 18,579.47 acres, were rejected; and the remaining 1,733 claims were confirmed by the board in the claimants.
In the pueblos of Pecos and Pojaque no Indians remain, but the board will investigate and pass upon title to the lands within the areas.
It is doubtful whether the pueblo of Zuni comes within the law, and few adverse claims exist in Laguna and Acoma.
The investigations in these five pueblos therefore will be less complicated and onerous.
The remaining four pueblos—San Juan, Santa Clara, San Ildefonso, and Cochiti—are distributed over an area of about 125 miles in length and 100 miles in width.
The work of the board involves hearings and investigations on each clain, the collection, translation, and abstracting of thousands of deeds, the examination of great numbers of witnessos, the study of extent, source, and character of Indian water rights and of adverse appropriations of Indian water by non-Indians.
The board must consider the history and status of conflicting Spanish grants.
It searches tax records in various county seats (which records are often incomplete and sometimes almost hopelessly confused).
It appraises land values and estimates damages.
It has many other collateral duties.
The amount of damage suffered by Indians for loss of lands and water through failure of the United States to prosecute rights of the United States or of the Indians, is also determined by the board, as is also the value of lands lost by settlers through adjudications of the board.
Congress has already made appropriations to cover losses on the Pueblos of Tesuque and Jemez, based on reports of the board, and recommendations will be made to the next Congress for appropriations to cover the awards on certain other pueblos.
These funds are to be used under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior for rehabilitating the pueblos, for the purchase of land, and for the recovery of water.
There are but few of the Sandias left, and these are reported to be backward.
The population of the other pueblos remains almost stationary.
Some of them'are distinctly progressive and energetic; others are apathetic and unable or unwilling to adapt themselves to presentday conditions.
The Lagunas are undoubtedly the most prosperous and energetic of any of the Pueblo Indians.
They are ambitious and enterprising, their people increasing in wealth, knowledge, and resources.
The pueblos of Isleta, Sandia, Santo Domingo, San Felipe, and Cochiti have lands within the Middle Rio Grande conservancy project which proposes the irrigation and drainage of a large area on the Rio Grande in central New Mexico, as described elsewhere in this report.
Upon the completion of the board's labors the status of all the pueblos should be greatly improved and the titles to the many valid claims within the pueblo areas will be cleared.
The status of the various suits to that end has been reported to the Attorney General by his special assistant in Santa Fe.
Generally, the courts have sustained the board's findings.
A survey of the principal irrigation projects was ordered on January 19, 1927, by the Secretary of the Interior.
The inspection was conducted by Porter J. Preston, engineer, Bureau of Reclamation, and Charles A. Engle, supervising engineer, Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The economic condition of the projects was studied by Ray P. Teele, an agricultural economist detailed by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Mr. Teele's work was terminated by death on August 31, 1927.
The report, which was the first comprehensive study of the problems of irrigation on Indian lands, was filed on June 8, 1928, and has since been studied by the officers of the department.
Irrigation was first undertaken by the Federal Government on behalf of the Indians about 60 years ago.
There are now about 150 irrigation projects on the various Indian reservations of the West.
The projects vary in area from a few acres to as many as 183,000 acres.
They comprise a total of 692,057 acres and have cost the Government in 60 years for construction and operation, $35,967,925.72.
The report shows that only $979,859.79, or 3.5 per cent, of the amount expended for construction of Indian irrigation works and which is reimbursable has been collected.
In only a few instances where Indian land is leased are Indians being required to pay construction charges.
In the report,it is estimated that the Government will ultimately sustain a loss of about $2,000,000 by reason of its inability to make collections on lands now in white ownership.
The total collections on account of operation and maintenance of the Indian projects amounted on June 30, 1927, to $2,638,311.33, or 29.9 per cent of the sum expended.
Approximately 70 per cent of the land susceptible of irrigation on Indian projects is in Indian ownership, the remaining 30 per cent being owned by whites.
The report shows that only 362,018 acres, or 52 per cent, of the reclaimed area, are now being irrigated; that only 117,189 acres, or 32 per cent, are irrigated by Indians; and that the remaining 244,829 acres, or 68 per cent, are irrigated by either white owners or lessees.
This means that only 16.9 per cent, or 117,189 acres of the total acreage on Indian projects for which water has been provided by the Government, is irrigated by Indians.
The report calls attention to the fact that on many of the so-called Indian projects most of the farming—in some cases practically all is being done by whites, either as lessees or owners.
For example, on the Wapato project, Yakima Reservation, the total acreage irrigated is 77,938, of which 4,661 acres, or 6 per cent, are irrigated by Indians; on the Blackfeet projec twith 7,149 acres susceptible of irrigation, only 44 acres, or about 0.6 of 1 per cent, are irrigated by Indians; on the Flathead Reservation the Indians are irrigating only 452 acres, or 1.3 per cent, of the 34,441 acres irrigated.
The Indians of the Uintah Reservation, of Utah, are doing more farming than are the Indians of any other reservation.
They cultivate 15,243 acres.
The Gila River, or Pima Reservation, of Arizona, is second with 12,000 acres farmed by Indians.
It is interesting to note that 40 per cent of all Indian farming on projects covered by the report is on the Uintah and Pima Reservations.
It is recited that on many projects the acreage utilized by Indians is continually decreasing, while the acreage utilized by whites is increasing.
Crops produced on irrigated lands farmed by Indians in 1927 had an estimated value of $1,500,000, or an average crop value of $21 per acre.
On the same projects, the average crop value or return secured by white farmers was approximately $40 per acre.
The report discloses that many Indians, particularly those on the northern projects, are securing insufficient returns from their irrigable land, some as low as $6 per acre.
Most of such land is not cultivated, and grows only wild hay.
The maximum farm income of Indian families on the more successful projects seldom exceeds $300 each per year.
The ultimate irrigable area, is estimated at 1,450,021 acres, indicating that the projects now are only 48 per cent completed.
To date, the average total irrigation cost per acre for the 692,057 acres is $52.
It is estimated that approximately $29,000,000 additional will be required to complete the projects.
The report of the survey contains 75 general recommendations.
Many of them will be made effective as rapidly as conditions permit.
In proper cases, necessary legislation will be recommended to Congress.
The report shows that changes in economic and social conditions in the region surrounding Indian reservations have profoundly affected life on those reservations, and that many of the problems in Indian affairs are due to lack of adjustment to these changes.
Increase in the white population surrounding reservations has advertised the irrigable Indian lands and the whites have increased their effort to own or control them.
Desire to acquire these lands has been greater by reason of the building of railroads and paved highways which bring the Indian lands closer to markets and make agriculture more profitable.
Costly irrigation works have been built under laws and policies that were based on the idea that the water would be used by Indians.
It was thought that the Indian lacked aptitude and experience and that he might require a long, unprofitable apprenticeship, before he would become a skilled irrigation farmer; consequently provisions for use of water or for paying for works were liberally drawn.
Such provisions were inadequate to meet abuses which might arise, if these lands and water supplies should pass into the control of the whites.
It has happened that on some of the reservations whites have demanded the same sort of contracts as were made for the Indians.
Controversy and uncertainty have followed with consequent threatened loss to the Indians and to the Government.
To adjust these controversies, it may be wise to increase the legal staff of the department.
Then the rights and financial obligations of both Indians and whites may be determined.
While travel facilities in national parks during the 56 years of their existence have developed in as unusual ways as have means of transportation elsewhere, the management of the parks has been conservative in adopting new methods for viewing these natural wonders.
Usually the wilderness character of the parks is one of their strongest appeals.
The policy of the Park Service, therefore, has been to preserve the beauties of nature in their original form but at the same time to make the principal points of interest accessible to the millions who make their pilgrimages each year.
Roads and trails, for example, are built to fit the scenery and to mar the landscape as little as possible.
Hotels and camps where required for cafés and housing accommodations, generally can be made to harmonize with their surroundings.
About 70 per cent of the 3,000,000 annual park visitors use private automobiles, while the transcontinental railroads convey nearly all the others.
It is a particular function of the National Park Service to provide within the parks, transportation facilities, hotels, and camps for the latter class.
These are provided through concessionaires, who operate under Government contract and supervision.
The free public camp grounds, established since the advent of the automobile, are operated by the National Park Service, the Government thus becoming the largest resort keeper in the country, and probably in the world.
In these public camp grounds there are provided pure water, sanitary conveniences, electric light, camp stoves, and in some, laundries, shower baths, and other facilities.
The Park Service is charged with the administration of the park areas, protection of park visitors, and supervision of services contracted by public operators.
The development of modes of travel in national parks has presented various problems.
The tourist has viewed the parks progressively afoot, on horseback, from stage coaches, and from automobiles.
Only 20 years ago the National Park Service was confronted with objections to the introduction into the parks of automobiles.
The protests of nature lovers were overcome finally by the crowds who emphasized the inadequacy of the horse-drawn stage and coach.
And now we find preserved as curiosities in some of the parks those "relics" of only a few years ago.
Many park tourists still prefer to tramp or to ride saddle horses.
Since many of the most beautiful areas are accessible only in this way, there is a constantly growing use of the modern trails.
But by far the greatest number of visitors travel through the parks in their own private automobiles or in motor busses over established routes.
The conservative attitude of the National Park Service is not based on a reluctance to discard the old and to adopt the new, but to a purpose to conduct millions of people through its domain safely and free from confusion and disturbance.
The modern airplane, with its increasing use as a means of passenger transportation, now presents a new problem.
Its employment has been urged upon park officials for a number of years, but as yet no permits have been issued for landing fields within park boundaries, and flying over the parks has been discouraged.
Admission of airplanes to national parks and regulation of their use, however, have been receiving the serious consideration of the department.
Manifestly the airplane will become an accepted means of transportation to and between national parks, if not in the parks.
Their use then will make it necessary for the service to provide them facilities and to regulate them.
The department has considered that the railroads, which in early times made the development of the parks possible, first should be heard in this connection.
It has peen proposed that they be permitted to build airports within the park lines near railroad terminals and to land passengers in the park at those airports, granting to private airplanes the use of such airports with a proper service charge.
On the other hand, it is urged that no encouragement should be given to the use of airplanes as sight-seeing conveyances, for the reason that it is impossible to obtain an accurate conception of the beauties and wonders of national parks by flying over them at safe altitudes.
Others aver that only from the air can a view be obtained of generally inaccessible and most interesting places.
There appears to be no general objection to the employment of airplanes between airports in the parks over routes to be established by the National Park Service and regulated by that service.
It seems evident, too, that unless airports shall be provided within the parks, under park supervision, the service can not expect to control flying over these areas.
During the coming winter a conference of national park officials, officials of railroads having terminals at the national park boundaries, officials of transportation companies now operating within the parks, and of others, will be called for a full discussion and consideration of the situation, in an endeavor to formulate a definite and rational air policy.
There are 24 Federal reclamation projects, comprising 1,956,910 irrigable acres, which have been developed, at a cost of $175,116,- 945.41.
The value of crops grown on land irrigated from Government works was $133,207,210.
These included lands irrigated by the canals built entirely by the bureau and canals supplied with water under Warren Act and other contracts.
Works now under construction involve a further ultimate expenditure of $90,000,000.
During the fiscal year progress was made in the construction of three large dams in California, Montana, and Utah, and contracts were awarded for the building of three other dams in Oregon, Idaho, and Washington, these projects all having been authorized by Congress and having been approved by the President and the then Secretary of the Interior.
They.
Construction of these projects, new and old, exclusive of such proposed projects as the Colorado and Columbia River Basins, will absorb entirely the reclamation fund over a period of some years.
Under present regulations there is a board of examiners on each project where public land is still available for entry.
These boards pass on qualifications of prospective settlers as to industry, experience, character, and capital.
Eight public-land units were opened to entry during the year on the Tule Lake division of the Klamath project in Oregon-California and 28 on the Willwood division of the Shoshone project in Wyoming.
Many of these units bave been entered by qualified settlers.
Options on a large number of farms in private ownership were obtained by the bureau on three projects.
These farms are selling to settlers on amortized payments over a period of 20 years.
The Bureau of Reclamation has a revolving fund of about $166,000,000 invested in reclamation projects.
This investment is in the nature of long-term loans to settlers on the projects.
The settlers are obligated to refund to the Government the cost of construction and operation in annual installments extending over a period of years.
As these payments replenish the revolving fund, they become available for developing new projects.
Twenty-two of the Federal projects are now making regular repayments to the Government, and there are but two completed projects that have not yet reached a repayment status.
The fund is also augmented by a portion of the money received by the Government from the sale of public lands, the accretion to the reclamation fund last year from this source amounting to $705,822.66.
Fifty-two and one-half per cent of all cash received by the Government as royalties from oil leases also goes into this fund and last year it was increased in the sum of $2,454,168.66 from this source.
Following the general readjustment of financial relations between the Government and reclamation project settlers, based on the relief act approved May 25, 1926, the repayment of charges by settlers against project lands showed an increase of 25 per cent during the year.
The repayment charges paid into the Treasury on this account amounted to $5,299,149.55, as compared to $4,260,221.35 for the previous year, a gain of $1,038,928.20.
The general prosperity on reclamation projects and the new terms of payment established for delinquents under the readjustment law are responsible for the increased return.
Of the 1,956,910 acres on the Federal irrigation projects there are 160,000 acres vacant and in need of settlers.
There are 12,678 farms cultivated by tenants.
Vacant farms and agitation by settlers for smaller yearly payments present serious problems for some projects.
Few settlers have the capital required to convert a tract of raw land into a productive farm, the cost of improving, equipping, and operating farms having doubled in recent years.
Hence, the bureau is seeking a better type of farmer with more capital and skill.
Modification of existing contracts to permit a longer period for repayment, or for a reduction of the indebtedness, is not encouraged.
It has been necessary for the department to control speculation in privately owned lands on proposed reclamation projects.
To prevent fictitious and prohibitive inflation of values of needed lands the Bureau of Reclamation, prior to construction, has entered into contracts with owners of private lands to be included in the irrigation district.
These contracts have provided for an appraisal of the lands at their fair values, without reference to the proposed irrigation development.
Under the reclamation laws water may be furnished to lands in private ownership not in excess of an area sufficient to support a family and to a maximum single ownership of 160 acres.
Under the contract all areas held in a single ownership in excess of 160 acres must be sold to settlers at pot more than the appraised value, which ranges from $1 to $20 per acre, depending on the topography and depth and character of the soil.
If a landowner holding an excessive acreage has refused to sign such a contract it has been held that he was not entitled to receive water, although his land has been assessable for the project charges because of its inclusion in the irrigation district.
In March, 1928, the Secretary of the Interior ordered an examination to be made by competent engineers to determine the safety of all storage dams under the jurisdiction of the department on reclamation projects and Indian reservations.
There are over 50 storage reservoirs under the control of: the department, located at various points in the West, which are used principally for irrigated agriculture.
They vary from small capacity to 2,638,000 acre-feet in the case of Elephant Butte Dam in New Mexico.
The dams that would endanger human life if they were to break were examined first.
Two consulting engineers were employed by the Bureau of Reclamation to collaborate with the regular engineering staff.
The War Department assigned a number of Army engineers to assist.
This examination is nearly completed.
All the dams thus far examined have been reported as safe and presenting no menace to human life or property.
While farmers on reclamation projects have suffered from the conditions which have depressed agriculture generally, many of the projects have prospered greatly and have been a benefit to the entire country.
Failure of some of them shows the need of further study of economic conditions and emphasizes the importance of local cooperation.
The greater repayments during the last two years indicate that reclamation is being placed on a more businesslike basis and should become a still more effective agency in the conservation and use of our natural resources.
In connection with the discussion by Congress of the proposed Boulder Canyon dam, on the Colorado River, a jointresolution passed by Congress and approved by the President on May 29, 1928, provides for the appointment of a board of engineers and geologists to examine the proposed site and to report its findings.
That the Secretary of the Interior is hereby authorized and directed to appoint a board of five eminent engineers and geologists, at least one of whom shall be an engineer officer of the Army on the active or retired list, to examine the proposed site of the dam to be constructed under the provisions of H. R. 5773, Seventieth Congress, first session, and review the plans and estimates made therefor, and to advise him prior to December 1, 1928, as to matters affecting the safety, the economic and engineering feasibility, and adequacy of the proposed structure and incidental works, the compensation of said board to be fixed by him for each, respectively, but not to exceed $50 per day and necessary traveling expenses, including a per diem of not to exceed $6, in lieu of subsistence, for each member of the board so employed for the time employed and actually engaged upon such work: And provided further, That the work of construction shall not be commenced until plans therefor are approved by said special board of engineers.
No authority hereby conferred on the Secretary of the Interior shall be exercised without the President's sanction and approval.
The expenses herein authorized shali be paid out of the reclamation fund established by the act of June 17, 1902.
Accordingly, with the approval of the President, the Secretary of the Interior on July 18, 1928, appointed the following engineers and geologists to comprise the Colorc 1o River Board: Maj. Gen. William L. Sibert, engineer, United States Army, retired; D. W. Mead, engineer, Madison, Wis.
Robert Ridgway, engineer, New York; Charles P. Berkey, geolögist, New York; and W. J. Mead, geologist, Madison, Wis.
A preliminary meeting of the board was held in Washington on July 30, 1928, for the purpose of organization.
The board selected General Sibert as its chairman and Mr. Berkey as secretary.
The Secretary of the Interior emphasized his desire for an independent study of the subject.
After a general discussion and an examination of the data available in the files of the department in Washington, the board adjourned'tó meet in Denver, Colo., on August 13, 1928, where the principal records and data to be considered were located.
Pursuant thereto the board has been making its investigations and is expected to file its report in accordance with the terms of the said resolution.
This report, when submitted, will be transmitted promptly to Congress.
Except for furnishing such information and assistance as was requested by the board, the department has had no part in the survey.
The production of potash, an essential in American agriculture, chemical industries, and the arts, has long been under foreign control.
The normal annual consumption of potash in this country has been about 250,000 tons, valued between $15,000,000 and $20,000,000.
In 1927 our domestic producers sold salts with 49,500 tons of potash content, as contrasted with imports of 224,973 tons.
Domestic production and sales represented only about 18 per cent of our national requirements.
Our Government took cognizance of our inadequate production of potash as early as 1910, and under congressional appropriations in 1911 the Departments of the Interior and Agriculture, through the Geological Survey and the Bureau of Soils, respectively, began coordinated but independent investigations covering a wide field of its possible sources.
Southeastern New Mexico and western Texas are underlain by extensive salt beds.
Geologically this area is similar to the potash fields of Europe.
In 1912 traces of potash in drilled wəlls were found in Texas.
In 1915 the Department of the Interior, through the Geological Survey, undertook to drill the salt beds near Amarillo, Tex.
The result was negative so far as potash was concerned, but since then the Geological Survey, partly in cooperation with the State of Texas, has had an observer in the Texas-New Mexico field to search for potash in oil-well drillings.
Since 1920, with the extension of oil-well drilling, there have been frequent manifestations of potash minerals.
Congress recognized the importance of these discoveries by the passage of the potash act in 1926 and authorized an appropriation of $100,000 annually for five years for investigations.
The Departments of the Interior and Commerce were thereby authorized to conduct joint explorations by core drilling to determine the extent and character of potash deposits in the United States.
By agreement between the departments, the Geological Survey, representing the Department of the Interior, selects the drilling sites, analyzes the core samples obtained, and publishes the results of the analyses.
The Bureau of Mines, representing the Department of Commerce, negotiates the use of the selected drilling sites and carries on the actual drilling operations.
Eight core tests will have been made by the cooperating departments.
All these tests have been developing the presence of potash-bearing minerals, and in at least three of the sites, one in New Mexico and two in Texas, the quality and thickness of the beds exposed by the core tests have been such as to give promise of commercial development.
The Government's activities have also stimulated private explorations with gratifying results.
The progress thus far made in potash explorations gives a growing assurance of the possibility of ultimate independence of foreign producers.
The Federal Oil Conservation Board, appointed by President Coolidge on December 19, 1924, is composed of the Secretaries of War, Navy, Interior, and Commerce.
The activities of the board are more closely connected with the Department of the Interior, however, than with the other departments represented, and the Secretary of the Interior continued as its chairman.
As President Coolidge set forth when he appointed the board, "The administration of oil resources is a practical question with the Department of the Interior."
The Government is possibly the largest lessor of oil land.
The second report issued in January, 1928, discussed possible substitutes for petroleum and also recorded a gratifying and increased interest in oil and gas conservation.
Indorsement has also been given to the work of the board by the technical and trade press, the purpose of the board to prevent waste of most valuable and necessary products having become known.
The board created the committee of nine, a representative group of lawyers and oil men.
The First Assistant Secretary of the Interior was a Government member and served as the committee's vice chairman.
This committee's report was made to the board in January, 1928, and recommends both Federal and State legislation to legalize agreements for cooperative development and operation of single oil pools and to permit curtailment of production in times of surplus supply.
The report also indorses earlier recommendations by the board itself that the Secretary of the Interior should have certain discretionary powers in administering public and Indian oil lands so as to promote practical conservation.
With the purpose of stimulating interest in these important matters by the State law-making bodies, the chairman of the Federal Oil Conservation Board has brought the committee's report to the attention of the governors of all the oil-producing States.
The cooperation urged upon the industry has become an active working force and practical conservation of this valuable resource is being attained through cooperation of Federal and State officials with the executives of oil companies.
Conservation in its broadest sense, however, is not yet an accomplished fact.
Much remains to be done, both by the Federal and State Governments if our natural petroleum resources are to be conserved.
One of the more important activities of the department has been a comprehensive study of negro colleges and universities throughout the United States.
This study was conducted by the Bureau of Education.
Its purpose was to ascertain the present status of negro higher education and to recommend means for its improvement and development.
The results show marked progress and an extraordinary demand among the negro people of the country for college and university education.
Of the 79 institutions included in the bureau's survey, 77 were doing college work as compared with 31 institutions 10 years ago.
The enrollment of negro students in those institutions totaled 13,860 as compared with 2,132 in 1917, a gain of 550 per cent.
For every 10,000 negroes in the United States 15 are attending college, as against 90 for every 10,000 whites.
With five exceptions, the colleges included in the study were located in Southern States, indicating a widespread sentiment in the South in favor of negro higher education.
Twenty-two of the institutions were operated by States and supported through public taxation.
The bureau's study also shows that the negroes, themselves, have not been remiss in providing higher education, 17 of their colleges being owned, administered, and financed entirely by members of their race.
The curricula in these 77 universities and colleges include, among others, courses in law, medicine, engineering, pharmacy, and dontistry.
In the publicly supported colleges operated by the States the work largely centers in teacher training, agriculture, home economics, and mechanic arts education.
The bureau's study shows that 963 negro youths were graduated last year with undergraduate degrees while 211 were graduated with the higher degrees.
The quest for higher education is not confined to young men of the race.
The report shows that negro girls are attending colleges in almost the same proportion as men.
In the institutions surveyed that reported enrollment of students by sex there were 5,944 negro girls enrolled as compared with 6,146 men, the proportion being 49 per cent girls and 51 per cent men.
Most of the girls attending negro colleges are training themselves to become teachers.
Others are enrolled in home economics courses.
Several of the institutions have also established training schools of nursing.
In the institutions studied by the bureau were three women's colleges, devoted exclusively to the higher education of negro girls.
There were also four colleges attended by men only, the remainder being coeducational.
The capital value of the investments in these negro schools was fixed at $15,720,000, including land, buildings, and equipment.
Ten years ago the total productive endowment of negro colleges amounted to $7,225,000, with an annual yield of $361,250, while last year the productive endowments aggregated $20,715,000, with an annual yield of $1,071,300, almost a fourfold increase in 10 years Yet the bureau found a shortage in the number of teachers.
It criticizes, too, their quality.
Most of the States have established land-grant colleges offering courses to the negro in agriculture, mechanic arts, and crafts, and the survey discloses his increasing interest and efficiency in them.
It declares the need, too, of more trained professional and technical leaders of the race, including doctors, dentists, lawyers, and preachers.
The negro population numbers 11,600,000, representing 9 per cent of the total population of the United States.
In the World War 368,000 negroes answered the call to the flag, and about 200,000 served in the American Expeditionary Forces in France.
Evidently the physical and intellectual wclfare of so large a proportion of the population is of first importance not only to the 9 per cent, but to the 91 per cent also.
The Department of the Interior might well have been named the department of western development.
From the date of its organization, nearly 80 years ago, this unit in the executive branch of the Government has had as the objects of its major activities the public lands and the Indians.
As the decades have passed the frontiers of departmental administration have been pushed ever westward until now Point Barrow on the Arctic, and the western shore of the island of Kaula, at the crossroads of the Pacific, are widely separated points on the far-flung limits of its jurisdiction.
In all these 80 years this executive department has been preeminently the friend of the pioneer.
The date of the creation of the Department of the Interior 1849—itself suggests western discovery, western exploration, western settlement, and western development.
The preceding half century had been the period of land acquisition by the young Nation.
In all this subsequent winning of the West the activities carried on under the Secretary of the Interior have constantly expanded in scope and become more varied in character.
Administrative policy has had its vicissitudes in this long period, but we can trace a general trend in policy and an uninterrupted growth in influence that reflect in turn the westward progress of national development.
The exploitation of the western country for its fur and gold was the purpose back of the explorations by the earlier pathfinders, but the fur traders and the gold miners were closely followed by the cattlemen and the homesteaders—a veritable army of occupation—home seekers more than fortune seekers.
In this period western settlement was necessarily guided by the explorers and surveyors sent out by the Department of the Interior, with the prime purpose of helping a pioneering people settle a vacant land.
The transformation of raw lands into homes was wrought upon an empire-building scale, for the real-estate operations of this department involved the disposal of hundreds of millions of fertile acres to a million and a third of home seekers.
Thus the western plains became the world's granary, and the mineral lands once in public ownership contributed to their private and corporate owners a goodly part of the world's output of metals.
Even witb all the seemingly lavish distribution of land under the homestead and other laws, as well as the land grants in aid of railroad and military wagon-road construction, the general purpose of which was settlement, the Federal Government remained a landowner on a very large scale, and into the business of handling this extensive estate new ideas found their way and a new land policy was gradually evolved.
Fact finding, largely conducted by the Department of the Interior, had brought home to the public more and more of an appreciation of the value of the public lands, even of that remnant left after the best of the timber, coal, and farm lands had been acquired by private citizens and corporations.
The policy of short cuts to settlement by wholesale grants and retail homesteads and mineral claims slowly gave place to a more thoughtful attitude as the limits to the public lands came to be realized.
In this development of a new public-land policy the officials of the Department of the Interior had a leading part; they logically became the active advisers of congres.
The new business policy for administering the national domain began to take shape about 20 years ago, but its evolution continues.
Its keynote has been to put to the best possible use whatever remains in public ownership—wise utilization of land, whether agricultural or mineral, grazing or irrigable, forest or power site.
Such a policy predicates scientific land classification.
Just as thoroughgoing inventory of the land and its resources is the first step in managing a landed estate, this inventory-making has been an outstanding function of the Department of the Interior as the administrator of the national domain.
Parallel with the new policy in promoting the best use of the public land has been the application of the same economic principles to the management of the Indian lands, of which the Secretary of the Interior stands before the law as the trustee.
The control of the national forests has been lodged with the Department of Agriculture, but the establishment of the national forest policy was based upon the pioneer work of the Department of the Interior in exploring, classifiying, and selecting the lands to be set aside for forest purposes.
Similarly, the present reclamation policy had its origin in fact-finding irrigation surveys, authorized 40 years ago.
And the laws providing for leasing lands that are chiefly valuable for the mining of coal, oil, gas, phosphate, or potash or the generating of water power likewise recognize scientific classification of the Nation's lands as an integral part of public}land administration.
At its start, half a century ago, the land classification was necessarily of the nature of a general and qualitative survey of the national domain, but the Interior Department engineers have been putting their investigations on a more and more detailed and exact basis, until now they seek to afford a quantitative determination of every natural resource that gives value to the publicly owned lands.
Only with the facts at hand as to the relative worth and possible use of these lands is it possible to administer properly the land laws of to-day and to propose more advanced laws for to-morrow.
One of the department's activities of interest to the farming and livestock industries is the mapping and classification of agricultural lands.
As a by-product of the examination of lands applied for under the enlarged and stock-raising homestead acts, areal classification maps of 290,000,000 acres of land on the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains and in the Great Plains have been published in preliminary form for the benefit and use of the Department of Agriculture and of ranchers in the West.
The maps show the areas of irrigated land, of first, second, and third grade, land suitable for dry-farming operations, land suitable only for grazing, and other special classes, and indicate what type of agricultural operations can be expected to be successful.
Similar mapping west of the Rockies is in progress.
Foremost among the present-day activities of the Government in planning for the future is its handling of the resources that represent the energy supply.
A national inventory of tons of coal, barrels of oil, and second-feet of water is a measure of the potentital aid that will be ready for American workers of the future.
With the present realization that the limit to be placed upon industrial progress is likely to be fixed by the amount of power available for doing man's work, it is a plain duty to safeguard the future with a business-like policy in developing these stores of oil and coal and in utilizing these power sites.
The people's interest in water resources is served only through use, and the proper utilization of the great irrigation reservoirs and the thousands of power sites on the public domain has been for many years the definite object of much of the activity of the Interior Department engineers.
The part that these water-power resources may have in future social progress is suggested by the estimate that the undeveloped power sites in the public-land States have an aggregate capacity of 15,000,000 horsepower.
Incidental to the continuing work of land classification in its broad sense, 23,000 miles of river surveys in the public domain remain to be made by Interior Department engineers.
The adoption by Congress of the leasing system, for the public oil and coal and other mineral lands, necessitated special business procedure in the administration of a great mineral estate.
The extent of this estate is not even yet adequately known; but it may be stated approximately as including 30,000,000 acres of coal lands that contain more than 200,000,000,000 tons of valuable coal, half a million acres of phosphate land that can supply 8,000,000,000 tons of this essential fertilizer as its need on American farms is better realized, an undetermined acreage of potash deposits, the best of which yet discovered are on public lands, 65 developed oil and gas fields with an annual production of 33,000,000 barrels of oil, and 4,000,000 acres of oil shale from which possibly 60,000,000,000 barrels of oil can be extracted when high prices arrive to warrant the higher cost.
In the management of this vast estate by the Interior Department the supervision of the 543 oil and gas leases together with the 22,000 prospecting permits is the largest item and the one requiring the highest degree of technical and legal attention.
Yet the more slowly growing demand for coal mines on the public domain forecasts an even more important factorin western development.
Probably it is the Nation's generous endowment of coal reserves that furnishes the greatest assurance of her future prosperity, and so it is more than a matter of passing interest that the cstimated quantity of coal in Government.ownership here in the western United States exceeds the total tonnage of all coal in the British Isles as estimated by Britain's most eminent authority.
The very responsible interest of the Interior Department in powersite reserves measures the duties of the Secretary of the Interior as a member of the Federal Power Commission and as the official having exclusive jurisdiction over earlier permits to power companies that generate more than 10 per cent of the public-utility power supply of the country.
In connection with their continuing study of the best methods of utilizing the water resources of the country, the engineers of the department collect and publish the monthly statistics of power generation.
Federal supervision of mining operations on Government leases is strict.
Although the specific duty of the officials in Washington and the engineers in the field is to enforce the terms of each lease, to see that the proper royalties are collected, and that the public interest is served, they also in large measure act in helpful cooperation with the lessees.
A Federal mining engineer who by his practical knowledge assists a private operator to attain a greater production at a smaller cost benefits not only that operator but the general public, and when he helps to bring about safer working conditions for the miners he performs genuine service to humanity.
When by advice against improper methods he prevents waste of the publicly owned deposits of coal, oil, or gas, he safeguards not only the public in its ownership but also the private operators in their investments.
There remain approximately 194,000,000 acres of unappropriated public lands in the United States, exclusive of the Territory of Alaska.
This acreage is equal to the combined area of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, Virginia, West Virginia, and North Carolina.
In a large proportion of the patents heretofore issued the minerals have been reserved to the United States to be administered as demand arises.
Mineral rights retained by the Government in entries patented under the stock raising law, which provides for reservation of all minerals, amount to 18,882,000 acres.
Rights to specific minerals have been retained in 11,750,000 acres.
In addition to the vacant unappropriated public lands and the reserved mineral deposits, approximately 135,000,000 acres in Federal ownership within the exterior limits of the national forests are subject to all the provisions of the mining laws, the mineral leasing act, and several other public land laws.
The low price of oil throughout the fiscal year, not only discouraged production, but necessarily resulted in diminished receipts for the quantity actually produced.
The income from other sources compared favorably with that received in recent years.
The total cash receipts from sales, leases, and other disposition of public lands (including receipts from copies of records, sales of Government property, etc.), were $6,194,767.01, and from sales and leases of Indian lands, $515,687.83, an aggregate of $6,710,454.84, all of which was deposited in the Treasury, to be distributed as follows: General fund, $1,290,895.09; public land States, $1,845,- 742.48; Indian tribes, $461,854.29; reclamation fund, $3,111,962.98.
Total expenditures for the conduct of the business of the General Land Office, including expenses of the district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and incidental expenses ($278,543.82) amounted to $2,190,197.57.
Disbursements from the following deposits, trust funds, and reimbursable appropriations are not included in the above figures, either as receipts or expenditures: From deposits by individuals for surveying public lands, $21,478.53; from completing surveys within railroad land grants, $3,407.77; from opening Indian reservations (reimbursable), $253.28; from surveying and allotting Indian reservations (reimbursable), $18,831.76; from surveying and allotting Northern Cheyenne Reservation, Mont., $17,530.55; and from miscellaneous Indian appropriations and funds, $5,791.99.
The appropriation for this service for the year 1928 was $430,000.
An average force of 72 inspectors was employed, exclusive of 7 division inspectors in direct charge of the field work.
The cost of maintaining division offices, with necessary clerical assistance, was also paid from this appropriation.
The total amount of cash collected and turned in to the Treasury during the year as a result of the work of this force was $38,054.33.
Of this amount $26,926.05 was in settlement of trespass cases; $5,026.40 secured through timber sales, and $6,101.88 recovered through civil and criminal action brought by the Department of Justice in cases of depredations on public lands and other violations of the public land laws.
Lands restored to the public domain as a result of investigations by inspectors, representing fraudulent entries, etc., canceled through proceedings based on their reports amounted to 153,139.29 acres.
Inspectors investigated and reported on 17,657 cases, of which 5,333 were reported adversely and 12,324 favorably.
There were held 333 hearings in Government contests.
Civil suits in 64 cases were recommended to the Department of Justice for court action as a result of investigations.
Of the 87 suits tried, 67 were won and 20 lost.
As a result of successful prosecutions the sum of $6,101.88 was recovered and 5,395.28 acres restored to the public domain.
There were 21 indictments returned for offenses against the public land laws.
Of the crimiral cases tried 11 resulted in convictions, under which there were 7 prison sentences and fines of $2,050 were imposed.
Payments of fines, based on previous convictions, amounted to $2,800.
The use in the field of Government-owned cars for which a larger appropriation than theretofore was made available during the year, resulted in material savings.
Such cars traveled a total of 542,436 miles at an average operating expense of $0.0594 a mile, including depreciation.
Hired cars covered 74,086 miles and cost $0.128 per mile.
The appropriation for protecting public lands, timber, etc., for 1928, provided an allotment of $25,000 for prevention and fighting of forest and other fires on the public lands.
The total expense incurred was $18,475.24.
The organization plan of the cadastral engineering service remains unchanged.
Field operating, cartographic drafting, and record offices are maintained at Helena, Mont.
Cheyenne, Wyo.: Denver, Colo.
Santa Fe, N. Mex.
Phoenix, Ariz.
San Francisco, Calif.
Reno, Nev.
Salt Lake City, Utah; Boise, Idaho; Olympia, Wash.
Portland, Oreg.
Juneau, Alaska, and at Washington, D. C., where action preliminary to survey initiation and acceptance is taken.
There is also maintained at Denver a headquarters office under the supervisor of surveys, who exercises general supervision over the execution of the public land surveys, under the direction of the Commissioner of the General Land Office.
Appropriations for surveys and resurveys for the fiscal year 1928 carried in the Department of the Interior act approved January 12, 1927, included surveying public lands, $800,000.
In addition $20,000 of the appropriation surveying and allotting Indian reservations (reimbursable), 1928, and $17,000 of the appropriation surveys, allotments, etc., Northern Cheyenne Reservation, Mont., 1928-29, and $500 of the appropriation general expenses, Indian Service, 1928, were transferred by the Office of Indian Affairs to this office for surveys and resurveys.
Other funds available and expended during the year for public land surveys included $6,800 from surveying within land grants (reimbursable); $5,000 from Coolidge Dam across Canyon of Gila River near San Carlos, Ariz. (reimbursable), 1928–29, and the following special deposits: Deposits by individuals, R. S. 2401, $362.78; act of September 21, 1918, $1,541.
76; act of February 27, 1889, $69.33; act of March 3, 1909, $244.79.
There was also expended from deposits by individuals (R. S. 2334) for office work in connection with mineral surveys, $19,135; in all, $870,653.
66.
The wider uses made of the public lands to-day through settlement by private enterprise under the mineral leasing act, and by the Government in scientific investigation and research work, call for cadastral surveys to meet the requirements of title, lease, location, and administration.
Original surveys and resurveys under the rectangular system were executed in 22 public land States and the Territory of Alaska under 257 groups, 109 of which, in 20 States, were of resurveys.
So much of this work as may still be gauged on a mileage basis aggregated during the year, 19,317 linear miles, which were surveyed at an average cost of $20.87 per mile.
Miscellaneous surveys included 89 field investigations, largely of erroneous and fictitious survey conditions, in Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Washington, Wyoming, and in eight States east of the Mississippi River; investigation of the Cimarron Base Line, Oklahoma; the location of section boundaries for the State highway commission, Montana; and corrective surveys of faulty older surveys in Montana and New Mexico.
Surveys to determine riparian conditions resulting from accretions and avulsions, to define swamp and overflow lands, and to return lands erroneously omitted at the time of the original survey, were made in New Mexico, Oregon, Louisiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Arkansas.
Also under this head surveys related to but not essentially a part of the rectangular system include 57 islands in Alaska, California, Idaho, Wyoming, Louisiana, Illinois, Mississippi, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Florida; seven town sites in Alaska including forest eliminations from the towns of Wrangell, Ketchikan, Cordova, and Juneau, as well as 16 lighthouse reservations, 16 isolated homesteads, 2 cemetery sites, and the Fort Liscum Military Reservation.
This diversified class also embraces 14 mineral segregation surveys, distributed throughout the western States.
Original surveys of lands deemed valuable for oil were continued throughout the year in castern and southeastern Utah, and initiated during June in western Wyoning, while the resurveys of oil shale areas in western Colorado were steadily carried forward with a view to completing all authorized projects of this character at an early date.
Surveys and resurveys for and in cooperation with other governmental agencies are steadily increasing in volume and broadening in scope.
Upon application by the Forest Scrvice surveys were exccuted in all western States and in Alaska, Florida, and Michigan.
For the National Park Service surveys in and of a part of the boundaries of the Glacier National Park, Mont., and resurveys in the Rocky Mountain National Park, Colo., were continued, while the survey of boundaries of the Grand Canyon National Park, Ariz., was initiated.
Surveys to identify coal leasing units in Utah and resurveys for oil leasing units along the east boundary of the Navajo Treaty Reservation, N. Mex., were made for the Bureau of Mines.
Field investigations for the Federal Power Commission were carried on in California, and the rectangular net in the Great Salt Lake Basin, Utah, was extended in cooperation with the Geological Survey.
Surveys on Indian reservations were made under various appropriations in Montana, Arizona, California, Oklahoma, Nebraska, South Dakota, Wyoming, New Mexico, Utah, and Minnesota.
Surveys and resurveys in 251 townships were platted and approved.
There were also 28 forest homestead entry surveys approved at an average cost of $10.81, 277 supplemental and segregation plats constructed, exclusive of 132 supplemental plats accompanying survey returns; and 275 mineral surveys, embracing 937 locations, platted at an average cost of $18.38 each.
The sum of $4,377.05 was earned during the year by the public survey offices in the Western States, exclusive of Alaska, through the furnishing of copies of records, and covered into the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
The map of the United States, edition of 1927, has been printed and is now ready for distribution.
The State maps of New Mexico and Michigan have been printed and issued.
The map of Minnesota has been revised, and that of the north half of California has been compilod and both are now in the hands of the contractor for printing.
The map of the United States west of the Mississippi River showing the activities of the Department of the Interior has been recompiled, and the maps of the Territories of Hawaii and Alaska, were revised and will be printed later.
An enlargement of the wall map of the United States on a scale of 21 miles to an inch is being prepared for the international exposition at Seville, Spain, also a delineation of the routes of the early Spanish explorers.
There were sold 17,752 photolithographic copies of township plats, for which $8,959 was received, and 7,896 copies were furnished other departments for official use.
There were distributed 169,138 circulars covering the various public land laws and the regulations thereunder, 2,572 maps mounted, and 3,815 State maps distributed.
The total area of public and Indian lands on which original entry was made and allowed was 3,726,421 acres, as compared with 3,594,838 acres the previous year.
Patents were issued covering 2,477,867 acres.
The homestead division considered 39,300 items under the homestead and related acts.
Patents were issued on 8,760 homestead entries, involving 1,927,869 acres.
Action was also taken upon 1,573 applications to make second homestead entry, 671 applications to amend, 744 applications for extension of time to establish residence and for leaves of absence, and upon 18,870 appeals from the action of district land officers.
Timber and stone applications were received to the number of 494, and 206 entries of that nature were approved for patenting.
Five new stock driveways were created under section 10 of the act of December 29, 1916 (39 Stat. 862), and 29 were modified after investigations.
The gross area withdrawn for such purposes was 29,962 acres, and that released from such withdrawal, 7,031 acres.
The area included in driveway withdrawals at the close of the fiscal year was 9,208,453 acres.
Action was taken on 33 town sites and 3,200 town-lot entries.
Two town sites and 688 lot purchases were passed to patent.
Efforts to adjust titles in the old town of Pensacola, Fla., under recent legislation, resulted in the requirement of additional proofs in a number of cases and the issuance of patents on 47 applications.
Sales were held of lots in the town sites of Hot Springs, N. Mex., and Lonepine, Mont.
A resurvey was made of St. Marks, Fla., and lands at Jupiter, Fla., were subdivided into town lots.
The records in 2,429 contested cases were received and 2,278 were adjudicated.
Two hundred and ten railroad right-of-way applications were received and considered; also 486 irrigation, electrical transmission, and miscellaneous right-of-way applications.
Twenty-two suits to secure forfeiture of rights of way were recommended and 27 decrees of forfeiture obtained as a result of previous recommendations; 54 suits are still pending.
As a result of applications theretofore made for restoration from power site withdrawals and classifications 62 restorations in accordance with the terms and conditions of section 24 of the Federal water power act were promulgated.
This class of work has been steadily increasing since the passage of the act in 1920.
Ninety-three hydroelectric power project applications have been transmitted here by the Federal Power Commission, involving public lands and lands within national forests in 12 States and the District of Alaska.
There were received 1,891 filings and entries for lands in Federal reclamation projects.
Of these cases, together with 255 on hand at the beginning of the year, 1,865 received action.
Since the passage of the act of August 11, 1916 (39 Stat. 506), applications by 35 State irrigation districts for approval under its provisions have reached the General Land Office.
Of these, three applications, embracing approximately 38,504.57 acres, were received during the past fiscal year.
Action was taken on five cases.
There have been in all 38 contracts containing designations under the act of May 15, 1922 (42 Stat. 541), of lands situated in 32 irrigation districts, embracing an area of 1,070,380.77 acres.
This makes a total of 53 districts approved under the two acts.
Twenty-two original reports and 15 supplemental reports were received as the result of investigations of private irrigation enterprises and State irrigation districts upon which claimants and applicants under the desert land law depend for their water supply, making a total of 1,388 such projects reported on since the adoption of the regulations of September 30, 1910 (30 L. D. 253–261).
There were also received from the Geological Survey nine reports bearing upon the water supply and feasibility of projects in connection with which investigations had been made.
Fifty-six irrigation companies and districts were considered during the year.
Withdrawals, segregations, and patent applications under the Carey Act, embracing 1,893,997.55 acres of either public or segregated lands, were considered.
Interlocutory or final action was taken upon 1,771,- 681.16 acres, leaving 122,316.39 acres awaiting decision.
Of the amount disposed of 639.33 acres theretofore segregated were patented; 128,387.04 acres were canceled, and the remainder received interlocutory actions.
The total area now segregated and unpatented is 766,732.08 acres.
Pittman Act applications and permits were disposed of as follows: 84 approved; 57 canceled; requirements made, 65; and 4 otherwise disposed of.
Twelve patents were issued on Pittman Act entries, and several final proofs submitted are in the field for investigation.
Twenty-two drainage entries under the Minnesota and Arkansas drainage acts were disposed of.
The swamp land work continues to be heavy.
New applications aggregating 138,352.80 acres and 103,084.75 acres in connection with which requirements had been made, were received, which, together with 58,992.77 acres pending, totaled 300,430.32 acres before the office for action.
Of this amount, 46,069.76 acres were approved and patented, 65,543 acres finally canceled, requirements made with respect to 83,076.14 acres, and 1,350.90 acres otherwise disposed of, leaving 104,390.14 acres awaiting office action.
Public lands to the extent of 938,829 acres were placed in a state of reservation, either by Executive or departmental order, under various applicable acts, for the purposes set forth in the various orders, and 776,573 acres theretofore reserved were restored to entry or other proper disposition.
The enactment of the law with reference to the leasing of lands in Alaska for fur farming (act of July 3, 1926, 44 Stat. 821), has aroused the interest of a great many people in the States who desire to use the public lands for such purpose.
At present a homestead entryman may use his land for fur farming, provided he otherwise complies with the homestead law.
Such use of the land alone, however, is not regarded as sufficient compliance with the law as to settlement and cultivation to entitle the homesteader to a patent.
There is some demand for extension of the act of July 3, 1926, to the public land States.
On January 30, 1928, circular No. 1108 was amended so that leases may cover an entire island, where the island contains not to exceed 30 square miles.
Where the area of an island is greater than 30 square miles, leases are not allowed in excess of 640 acres.
Where the islands are so close together that animals can cross from one island to the other, more than one island may be included in a single lease.
Action was taken on 63 cases involving the issuance of leases under said act of July 3, 1926, and three leases, two for 640 acres each and one for an island, were issued.
Action was taken on 39 applications to purchase 5-acre tracts in Alaska under the act of March 3, 1927 (44 Stat. 1364), and on 25 trade and manufacturing entries under the act of May 4, 1898 (30 Stat. 419).
Selections of indemnity school lands were received amounting to 101,881.01 acres and 194.59 acres of lands under grants in quantity for specific purposes, total 102,075.60 acres.
There were conveyed to the States 52,589.20 acres of indemnity school lands and 884.13 acres of quantity grant lands while 22,007.09 acres of indemnity school-land selections and 158.95 acres of quantity grant selections were rejected and canceled, making a total of 75,639.37 acres finally adjudicated.
Title to 4,642.55 acres of land was conveyed to the State of Washington under cooperative agreement providing for the exchange of school-section lands within the boundaries of national forests for other lands within such boundaries.
In all, there have been conveyed to the States pursuant to such agreements an aggregate of 655,673.72 acres.
The act of January 25, 1927, granting mineral school sections to the various States has materially increased the work of the General Land Office, in that it is now incumbent upon that office to determine whether the various school sections pass to the States under the original granting acts as nonmineral land, or under the provisions of said act of 1927 as mineral lands.
On the first day of the year the office had before it for consideration the status of 64S school sections.
Cases involving 922 school sections were received.
The titles to 880 school sections were finally adjudicated.
In 209 cases further showing was required and 481 cases were awaiting examination on the last day of the year.
The 880 adjudications involved 112,077.65 acres found to have passed to the State under the original granting act, 38,529.47 acres found to have passed under the act of July 25, 1927, and 39,966.43 acres found to have passed to the State, but in which the act was not specified.
Railroad and wagon-road listings and selections were received to the extent of 117,672.77 acres; 85,729.79 acres were certified or patented in satisfaction of such grants; 44,840 acres of selections were rejected, the total acreage adjudicated being 130,569.79 acres.
Public resolution approved June 5, 1924 (43 Stat. 461), created a joint congressional committee empowered and directed to make a thorough and complete investigation of the land grants of the Northern Pacific Railroad Co. and the facts and the laws pertaining thereto.
House joint resolution of May 28, 1928, suspended action onthe grant by the department until June 30, 1929.
The work of adjusting the following 11 railroad land grants was completed: Central Pacific; California & Oregon; Cairo & Fulton; Little Rock & Memphis; Tennessee & Coosa; Alabama & Chattanooga; South & North Alabama; Selma, Rome & Dalton; Marquette; Houghton & Ontonagon; Chicago & North Western; and Florida Central & Peninsular Railroad Cos.
Two of these adjustments, the Central Pacific and the California & Oregon were approved and the others are awaiting action by the beneficiaries, either by way of acceptance or protest, before being submitted for approval.
Three other adjustments are progressing rapidly, viz, Cedar Rapids & Missouri River; Flint & Pere Marquette; and Amboy, Lansing & Traverse Bay Railroad Cos.
The work necessitated a careful tract book, survey plat, and grant plat examination of each smallest legal subdivision in 21,765,818.43 acres of granted and indemnity land, and the transfer thereof and of the former and present status of each smallest legal subdivision to the adjustment sheets.
In effect this work means the complete reexamination of every transaction heretofore made in connection with each grant with regard to then existing law.
Six tracts embracing 235.94 acres of revested lands, situated within what is now the Roseburg land district, were restored to homestead entry.
An area of 1,062,000 acres of such lands had heretofore been restored, which with the 235.94 acres make a total of 1,062,235.94 acres that have been restored to entry.
Under the act of June 9, 1916 (39 Stat. 218), 59 sales of timber on Oregon & California Railroad lands were made, involving 7,311.49 acres of land, containing 261,585,000 feet board measure of timber, for which the sum of $490,445 was received.
Total sales to date, 545; area, 81,545.13 acres, containing 1,666,255,000 feet board measure of timber.
Total receipts, $4,581,338.42.
Under the acts of June 9, 1916 (39 Stat. 218), and February 26, 1919 (40 Stat. 1179), five sales of timber on Coos Bay lands were made, involving 42,560,000 feet board measure of timber on 740 acres, for which the sum of $82,460 was received.
Total sales to date, 74; acres involved, 13,340.61 acres, containing 472,427,000 feet board measure of timber; total receipts, $1,169,747.54.
There were examined and audited claims of certain counties in Oregon for amounts in lieu of taxes on revested Oregon & California Railroad grant lands under the act of July 13, 1926 (44 Stat. 915), as follows: For the years 1916 to 1925, inclusive, allowed for $325,516.23 and rejected for $172,297.36; for the year 1926 various claims were allowed for $585,461.46, and rejected for $26,884.03.
Eleven claims in the total amount of $435,082.55 for the year 1927 were received, of which seven were allowed for $281,382, and rejected for $151.66.
The other four claims were received too late for audit during the fiscal year.
There were 143 oil and gas cases on hand involving leases and relief applications under sections 14, 18, 18a, 19 and 22 of the act of February 25, 1920 (41 Stat. 437).
During the year 731 applications were considered, 2 permits and 40 leases being granted.
Under section 14 of the leasing act which authorizes leases to permittees who show a discovery of oil or gas as a result of prospecting under a permit, 36 leases were issued covering an aggregate of 18,528.94 acres.
Under section 17 of the leasing act authorizing the public sale of leases two leases were issued in the Kern River Oil Field, Calif., and one in the Alkali Butte Field, Wyo., aggregating 479.45 acres, on which bonuses were paid amounting to $672,500.
However, under sections 13 and 20 of the act 3,876 new applications were received and 53,121 cases for reconsideration.
Permits were granted on 4,402 applications.
Final action in whole or in part was taken on 4,088 cases; 927 assignments were acted upon, and 5,158 applications for extensions of time were disposed of, all except the first mentioned showing a very marked increase over last year.
Three thousand seven hundred and thirty-nine permits were held for cancellation, and 7,970 permits were canceled in whole or in part; 26,274 cases were examined on which further action was necessary, leaving 4,439 cases awaiting consideration at the close of the year, of which 2,371 were pending reports from the Geological Survey.
There were in hand 93 mineral entries and 1,367 were received; 1,397 were disposed of, leaving 63 awaiting action.
Of those disposed of 350 were approved for patent.
Two coal entries were approved for patent, covering 357.18 acres based on rights initiated under coal land laws prior to the enactment of the leasing act February 25, 1920.
Eighty-five potash permits were issued under the act of October 2, 1917, covering an aggregate of 157,307.83 acres.
Under the act of February 25, 1920, 14 sodium permits were issued covering an aggregate of 21,421 acres.
There were in hand at the beginning of the year, 160 applications for coal permits, leases, and licenses; 2,191 applications were received; 83 coal prospecting permits issued covering an aggregate of 100,468.63 acres; 37 coal leases covering an aggregate of 9,126.05 acres; 8 coal licenses covering an aggregate of 320 acres.
The total number of cases disposed of during the year was 2,193, leaving 158 cases in hand.
The area included in coal prospecting,permits during the year increased by 4,160 acres.
Three coal permits aggregating 5,315.66 acres were issued in Alaska.
There were in hand 27 miscellaneous mineral cases, and there were received 1,649 cases; of this number 1,601 were disposed of, leaving in hand 75 cases.
On July 1, 1927, 65 mineral applications were pending; 421 applications were received, and 466 were disposed of, leaving 20 mineral applications in hand at the close of the year.
Receipts of the Federal Government from bonuses, rentals, and royalties under the law providing for the leasing of mineral rights on the public domain aggregated $4,677,277.16.
The largest receipts were obtained from leasing mineral lands in Wyoming, the amount being $2,940,091.
The second State in the amount of receipts was California with $1,389,800.40.
Receipts from other States follow: Montana, $119,070.36; Colorado, $96,789.01; Utah, $58,081.38; North Dakota, $32,740.14; New Mexico, $25,835.27; Washington, $3,976.86; Louisiana, $3,871.18; Alabama, $3,036.10; Idaho, $2,482.41; Nevada, $1,463.05; South Dakota, $40.
Pursuant to the mineral leasing law, each State receives 3712 per cent of the receipts from bonuses, rentals, and royalties derived from public lands within its borders, the reclamation fund receives 5212 per cent, and the other 10 per cent is paid into the Treasury of the United States and credited to miscellaneous receipts.
On February 1, 1928, the department approved a revision of the regulations of April 15, 1918 (46 L. D. 344), governing Indian allotments on the public domain under section 4, act of February 8, 1887 (24 Stat. 388), and amendments thereto.
Action was taken on 3,705 applications for fee and trust patents.
Trust patents issued on 1,261 allotments embracing 202,963.52 acres; fee patents issued on 1,352 allotments, for 173,606.44 acres, and in addition patent issued on 6 Indian homestead entries for 360 acres.
Homestead entrymen and purchasers of lands within the former Cheyenne River and Standing Rock lands, to the number of 2,844, were notified of the payments required pursuant to the act of March 31, 1928 (45 Stat. 400).
Action was taken on 5,531 cases involving entries and purchases of ceded Indian lands.
The action related principally to requirements as to payments.
A large number of these entries was for Fort Peck lands, Mont.
The several acts of Congress empowering certain Indian tribes to sue in the Court of Claims for moneys alleged to be due them for treaty lands required the expenditure of a very considerable amount of labor and research in ascertaining the acreages of the tracts involved, and the manner of disposition and the amounts received therefor.
Some cases embrace a large, portion of the area of several States.
Several such claims, involving large acreages of land and large sums of money, are now pending for answer to questions by the Depart.
There were considered 108 cases involving old Spanish and other private land grants, and 114 small holding claims, 253 cases involving lands in abandoned military reservations, 632 soldiers' additional applications, 135 scrip rights, 85 preemption and 118 old credit and cash entries, 19 military bounty land warrant locations, and 1,408 proposed exchanges of privately owned land for Government land or timber.
Accounts were stated in 254 repayment cases and 124 such claims were denied.
Twenty-nine entrymen for Mud Lake Bottom lands, Minn., were allowed $34,850.58 pursuant to the act of May 3, 1928 (45 Stat., Part 2, 34).
Minnesota Chippewa Indian timber to the extent of 886,890 feet was cut under contracts entered into under the act of June 27, 1902 (32 Stat. 400).
One national forest was created by exclusion from an existing forest, three were enlarged, and 15 reduced under the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat. 34).
Two national forests were reduced and 16 enlarged under special acts of Congress and 9 forests established under section 9 of the act of June 7, 1924 (43 Stat. 653), were abolished.
There are now 151 national forests embracing within their exterior boundaries 184,403,819 acres, of which slightly over 86 per cent is public land.
The increased interest in aviation during the past two years has caused a demand for suitable aviation fields and airports.
Leases therefor were made to a number of cities and towns under special laws.
The act of May 24, 1928 (Public, 499), which was introduced at the suggestion of this department, provides a general law for leasing public lands for aviation purposes.
Such areas are each limited to 640 acres of contiguous land.
The law provides for an annual rental for a period of 20 years, subject to renewal for like periods.
All departments and agencies of the United States operating aircraft are to have free and unrestricted use of the airports.
If necessary for military purposes, the Government may assume full control of them.
Permission may also be granted to establish beacon lights on public lands, and the Secretary of the Interior may withdraw public lands, other than terminal airports, for use as beacon sites or other air navigation facilities.
Prior to the approval of the act of May 24, 1928, public lands were subject to withdrawal by the President for public purposes, and the authority of the President to make such withdrawals is in no manner restricted by such act.
Where, therefore, unappropriated public lands are desired by the Department of Commerce or other Federal agencies for aviation purposes, requests for their withdrawal may be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for consideration by the President.
Instructions were issued January 7, 1928, Circular No. 1138, for the leasing of land in Alaska for grazing livestock in pursuance of the provisions of the act of March 4, 1927 (44 Stat. 1452).
Three grazing districts were temporarily established in accordance with said act, effective June 30, 1928, to coincide with the three public land districts of Alaska.
March 29, 1928 (Public, No. 210), Congress passed an act authorizing cooperative agreements with the State of Montana and private owners of lands within certain limits in the State of Montana, whereby such privately owned lands and lands within the same area belonging to the United States may be jointly leased for a period of not to exceed 10 years to stockmen owning land within or adjacent to the said area.
This measure applies to 108,804 acres of rough grazing land in Montana of which the United States own 27,534 acres.
Nothing has developed during the fiscal year demanding any radical or major change in our public-land system, although the wisdom of previous efforts to secure general legislation for the regulation of stock grazing has been more fully demonstrated.
The distribution or the economic and equitable use of our arid and semiarid public lads is a problem the solution of which requires our best thought and endeavor.
The 320-acre entry law, or, as it is sometimes called, the dry farming act, and the stock raising homestead law, allowing 640-acre homestead entries, have proven of value, but the areas where dry farming may be successfully conducted and the lands which in parcels of 640 acres will support a family have been largely reduced.
The stock raising homestead acts, with their present limitations, do not meet the conditions of to-day.
Through sufferance our public lands have become in theory a grazing common, but through the lack of supervision in many instances they are not available to all on equal terms.
Furthermore, lack of control has resulted in over use—destructive of the forage growths.
And yet enormous investments in flocks and herds have been made in faith of an open range, and any proposed legislation must take into consideration conditions as they actually exist.
There are among the range users three widely divergent schools of thought; first, those who prefer the present system and who oppose any form of restriction, and likewise oppose any liberalization of existing law looking to disposal of the lands by the Government; second, those opposing organized control but favoring a measure that will permit of the disposition of the lands under the homestead laws in parcels of 1,280 acres or more; third, those advocating strict governmental supervision, with the recognition of present users under a leasing system and the repeal of the stock raising homestead law.
The department has inclined to regulation through leasehold, with proper restrictions and safeguards for the present users, and has repeatedly recommended the enactment of a law authorizing such control.
If Congress will not enact such a measure then the department suggests an amendment of the stock raising homestead law so as to permit of the acquisition of parcels of 1,280 acres under its provisions.
If a law permitting regulation through lease be passed, the stock raising homestead act should be repealed; otherwise the stock raising homestead act should be so amended as to be responsive to our present needs.
Many of the measures recommended in the report of last year were enacted during the first session of our present Congress.
The urgent need of a law authorizing the disposition of withdrawn lands and areas omitted from former surveys as water covered, but since ascertained to be arable, in the State of Florida, will be met by the enactment of H. R. 11281, in the form it passed the House of Representatives.
The Secretary will be authorized to afford equitable relief in certain claims held under color of title if S. 3776, which has passed the Senate, becomes a law.
These measures should pass.
For the reasons stated in the report for 1927 it is recommended that provision be made for the disposition of the withdrawn areas in Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Michigan, and Wisconsin; that the act of July 5, 1884, be so amended as to include other abandoned Government reservations, and that authority be given for an additional volume of the work "Public Domain," so as to bring it down to date.
The general medical work of the Indian Bureau was continued through the year with good results.
The difficulties incident to the administration of this service as outlined in the Secretary's annual report of the fiscal year 1927 continue to obtain to a greater or less degree.
Many years will be required before the necessary improvements can be carried out to place this service on a more efficient basis, to reduce the turnover of medical and nursing personnel, still unduly high, and to create other factors which will provide a well palanced and equalized medical and surgical service for the Indian wards of the Government.
Trachoma, tuberculosis, and the diseases of infancy and childhood continue to be the outstanding health problems of this race.
It is felt that progress is being made, particularly in trachoma control, through the establishment of trachoma and nontrachoma schools and the closer delineation of the trachoma activities of the special physicians.
The following additional hospitals were constructed during the year and opened at the beginning of the new year: At the Albuquerque School, N. Mex., with 60 beds; Chin Lee, Ariz., and Tohatchi, N. Mex., schools with 15 beds each; Taos Pueblo, N. Mex., with 12 beds; and Havasupai Hospital, Ariz., with 6 beds.
The new hospital at Choctaw Agency, Miss., was opened during April, with 25 beds, and nearly 100 patients were admitted up to June 30.
A 36-bed general hospital was opened at the Western Navajo Agency, Ariz.
Plans were also made for the conversion of the Kayenta Boarding School within the Western Navajo Reservation into a sanatorium with 40 beds for tuberculosis and 10 for general patients.
Authority was received during the past year for the installation of X-ray machines and other laboratory facilities in our general and tuberculosis hospitals.
Increased facilities are being provided in our general hospitals for the treatment of advanced cases of tuberculosis not suitable for or unwilling to receive treatment in the established sanatoria.
The nursing service, which was increased considerably during the year, 21 hospital nurses having been added to the staff, will require additional numerical strength before being placed on anything like an adequate basis.
The steps already taken will tend considerably toward reduction of the high turn-over in this personnel.
The public-health nursing work is being better organized, and it is felt that the quality of this service is showing considerable improvement.
Twelve new positions of this nature have been established.
During the year there has been an unusually high incidence of both measles and influenza, particularly with reference to the Indian population of the Southwest.
This, both directly and indirectly, is a factòr of considerable importance in the lighting up of old cases of tuberculosis and in increasing the susceptibility of the younger population.
The effects of an undue prevalence of these two diseases will influence tuberculosis cases for many years.
From data thus far received indications point to a decrease in the number of cases of trachoma found during this fiscal year as compared to prior years.
The factors having to do with a determination of the actual number of cases of tuberculosis are so many and so complicated that no accurate statement can be made regarding the increase or decrease of this disease.
The services of the medical and nursing personnel on the whole have been loyal and efficient.
There is still at most reservations an inadequate number of both medical and nursing personnel and the physical facilities at most places are yet below accepted standards.
A general improvement along these lines is apparent.
In addition there has been a carefully prepared plan of expansion of present hospital facilities.
On the whole, good service has been performed.
Considerable difficulty has been experienced in providing a sufficient water supply free from contamination at some places and the .
Public Health Service was called upon to investigate and report what methods are required to correct same.
The Institute for Government Research also called attention to the need for improvement of the water supply at some jurisdictions.
A consulting engineer has been added to our corps of employees for the purpose of making a survey of the water and sewer systems at every jurisdiction in the service and to make such recommendations as may be necessary to insure an ample supply of pure water and sanitary sewerage disposal.
For the fiscal year 1927 there was given a comparative statement showing enrollment of Indian pupils in Federal boarding and day schools by grades and there is appended a statement extending the comparison to include the year 1928.
It will be noted that while the number of beginners is 250 less than in 1925–26, there is an average increase in the number in higher grades demonstrating an advance in their studies accomplished by a considerable number of pupils and a gradual trend toward an education higher than elementary.
Later reports, embodied in Table No. 3, in the appendix to this report, will show a slightly different total for 1928.
Indian schools owned and conducted by the Federal Government were inaugurated in 1870, pursuant to an appropriation by Congress of $100,000.
The growth of the boarding and day schools has been gradual since that date, culminating at the present time in 77 boarding schools and 129 day schools, which have a total capacity for accommodation of approximately 26,000 pupils.
Of the boarding schools 58 are situated within Indian reservations for the children of the tribe or tribes domiciled there, and 19 of the number are termed nonreservation schools because they are not within a reservation, but at other conveniently selected places and receive children from any or all tribes within the approximate geographical district of the school.
It has been found necessary from time to time to discontinue day schools because of changing tributary school population, but on the other hand new boarding schools have been established or others enlarged within the past few years in furtherance of a policy to eventually provide educational facilities for all Indian children, deducting, of course, from the total number of eligible children those who can to advantage attend State public schools and about 5,000 who attend mission schools operated by several religious denominations.
Of eligible Indian children from 6 to 18 years of age, inclusive, there are approximately 78,000, the number being more definitely shown by statistical Table No. 2.
Education of Indians in State public schools has been promoted and has rapidly increased since the year 1900, through the efforts of the bureau facilitated by congressional appropriations for payment of tuition to the public schools.
There were during the year about 35,000 Indians in the public schools.
This policy is believed expedient from all points of view and it may be anticipated that many children not now attending will be placed in the public schools within the next two or three years.
Existing law (act of February 21, 1925, 43 Stat. L. 958) permits the expenditure of only $300 per pupil per year for schools having an average attendance of less than 200, and $270 for schools with an attendance of 200 or more.
Annual appropriations, however, have been less than these limitations.
For the fiscal year the appropriations for boarding schools allowed expenditures at a rate of $225 per capita, with exceptions in cases of five small schools for which $250 was appropriated.
The current expenditures by the schools were necessarily curtailed in order to avoid incurrence of deficits, and while the stringency of funds was felt in many other respects, its effect upon the supply of adequate food for pupils was more especially evident.
Increases in salaries under reclassified compensation scales have added materially to cost of operation and while the increases provided by the act of May 28, 1928 (the Welch Act), were not in effect, yet for the ensuing year these will total $322,531.
It is generally admitted that the economies which Federal Indian schools have been compelled to practice have been harmful, and more adequate funds will have to be provided if Indian education is to advance.
Extension of the platoon system of class organization to many of the larger boarding schools has been delayed until teachers, space, and facilities could be secured.
However, the additional instructors necessary have been secured for a considerable number of schools and it is now possible to progress with the development of the plan.
During the year attendance of pupils of the first three grades during both forenoon and afternoon class sessions was accomplished in many more schools pursuant to instructions issued to such effect.
Under prior existing law 30 days' educational leave has been allowed to instructors in Indian schools in order that their service might be rendered more efficient by attendance at college or normal summer courses for teachers.
As these courses are not less than of six weeks' duration, the time allowed was insufficient and credits could not be earned by the teachers.
A change in the law was secured, as provided by the act of May 8, 1928, authorizing 60 days' educational leave in every alternate year for both teachers and physicians.
Reports from the field indicate that there has been a steady increase in the acreage cultivated by the Indians.
It is the purpose of the bureau to encourage efficient cultivation of a moderate-sized tract rather than to urge seeding indiscriminately without regard to quantity or quality of crops.
There is not insistence that all Indians take up farming or stock raising.
Where it is evident that they are not fitted for these industries or have no inclination therefor, they are encouraged and assisted in finding other employment.
This is especially true of many of the younger generation who have a fair English education, together with industrial training, and hence can readily find remunerative employment.
Despite the many drawbacks to farming, such as floods, late springs, and early frosts in the mountains, and droughts and hot winds in the South and Middle West, the Indian farmers and stockmen manage to fare about as well as the average white man under similar circumstances.
The superintendent of one reservation in Montana reports that although all sorts of setbacks were encountered last year, the Indians raised 51,780 pounds of garden vegetables, such as carrots, beets, onions, rutabagas, turnips, and cabbages.
One of the main objectives of the industrial program for the Indians is to have each family own and properly care for a milch cow.
One instance of success in so doing was at the Colorado River Agency, in Arizona.
The superintendent there selected six families and sold cows to them on the reimbursable plan.
Five of the six families are producing all the milk they can use and making some butter and cottage cheese, thereby reducing their food bills materially.
The superintendent of the San Carlos Agency, Ariz., reports that last year 3,117 calves were branded for individual Indians, or a calf crop of about 55 per cent, as compared with 797 calves in 1923, when the industrial program was inaugurated.
The sheep industry was started two years ago at Fort Berthold, N. Dak., by providing 20 head for each of 7 families.
In the spring of 1928 there were 19 families with sheep, some having as many as 90 head.
Where this number was found the original sale was increased by a second sale on the part of the superintendent, or the Indian bought a few more head on the market.
The natural increase averages about 30 head per family.
The superintendent has been collecting for the Indian owners on these sheep $1.50 per head from each wool clip and $1 from the sale of each wether lamb.
Accordingly, the Indians are gradually reducing their debt and increasing the fund for the conduct of their business.
The livestock industry throughout the country generally is again on a substantial basis, and the Indians have benefited materially through the higher prices received for their stock as the result of improved conditions.
The returns which they received from the sheep industry have been particularly gratifying, and due to that fact the Indians are taking a very active interest in selecting and developing their flocks.
Satisfactory progress has been made during the year toward the removal and disposition of worthless horses on the various reservations.
One concern reports that it has purchased 117,000 such horses in North and South Dakota, Wyoming, and eastern Montana.
Reports indicate that from 6,000 to 8,000 horses have been sold from other reservations during the year.
Arrangements have been made to dip all horses on the Blackfeet Reservation, which has been under quarantine for several years due to the presence of scab, and such horses as the Indians wish to dispose of will be purchased by the company mentioned.