To the Senate and House of Representatives: The Constitution requires that the President "shall, from time to time, give to the Congress information of the state of the Union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient."
In complying with that requirement I wish to emphasize that during the past year the Nation has continued to grow in strength; our people have advanced in comfort; we have gained in knowledge; the education of youth has been more widely spread; moral and spiritual forces have been maintained; peace has become more assured.
The problems with which we are confronted are the problems of growth and of progress.
In their solution we have to determine the facts, to develop the relative importance to be assigned to such facts, to formulate a common judgment upon them, and to realize solutions in spirit of conciliation.
FOREIGN RELATIONS We are not only at peace with all the world, but the foundations for future peace are being substantially strengthened.
To promote peace is our long-established policy.
Through the Kellogg-Briand pact a great moral standard has been raised in the world.
By it fifty-four nations have covenanted to renounce war and to settle all disputes by pacific means.
Through it a new world outlook has been inaugurated which has profoundly affected the foreign policies of nations.
Since its inauguration we have initiated new efforts not only in the organization of the machinery of peace but also to eliminate dangerous forces which produce controversies amongst nations.
In January, 1926, the Senate gave its consent to adherence to the Court of International Justice with certain reservations.
In September of this year the statute establishing the court has, by the action of the nations signatory, been amended to meet the Senate's reservations and to go even beyond those reservations to make clear that the court is a true international court of justice.
I believe it will be clear to everyone that no controversy or question in which this country has or claims an interest can be passed on by the court without our consent at the time the question arises.
The doubt about advisory opinions has been completely safeguarded.
Our adherence to the International Court is, as now constituted, not the slightest step toward entry into the League of Nations.
As I have before indicated, I shall direct that our signature be affixed to the protocol of adherence and shall submit it for the approval of the Senate with a special message at some time when it is convenient to deal with it.
In the hope of reducing friction in the world, and with the desire that we may reduce the great economic burdens of naval armament, we have joined in conference with Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan to be held in London in January to consider the further limitation and reduction of naval arms.
We hold high hopes that success may attend this effort.
At the beginning of the present administration the neighboring State of Mexico was best with domestic insurrection.
We maintained the embargo upon the shipment of arms to Mexico but permitted the duly constituted Government to procure supplies from our surplus war stocks.
Fortunately, the Mexican Government by its own strength successfully withstood the insurrection with but slight damage.
Opportunity of further peaceful development is given to that country.
At the request of the Mexican Government, we have since lifted the embargo on shipment of arms altogether.
The two governments have taken further steps to promote friendly relationships and so solve our differences.
Conventions prolonging for a period of two years the life of the general and special claims commissions have been concluded.
In South America we are proud to have had part in the settlement of the long-standing dispute between Chile and Peru in the disposal of the question of Tacna-Arica.
The work of the commission of inquiry and conciliation between Bolivia and Paraguay, in which a representative of this Government participated, has successfully terminated an incident which seemed to threaten war.
The proposed plan for final settlement as suggested by the neutral governments is still under consideration.
This Government has continued its efforts to act as a mediator in boundary difficulties between Guatemala and Honduras.
A further instance of profound importance in establishing good will was the inauguration of regular air mail service between the United States and Caribbean, Central American, and South American countries.
We still have marines on foreign soil--in Nicaragua, Haiti, and China.
In the large sense we do not wish to be represented abroad in such manner.
About 1,600 marines remain in Nicaragua at the urgent request of that government and the leaders of all parties pending the training of a domestic constabulary capable of insuring tranquility.
We have already reduced these forces materially and we are anxious to withdraw them further as the situation warrants.
In Haiti we have about 700 marines, but it is a much more difficult problem, the solution of which is still obscure.
If Congress approves, I shall dispatch a commission to Haiti to review and study the matter in an endeavor to arrive at some more definite policy than at present.
Our forces in China constitute 2,605 men, which we hope also further to reduce to the normal legation guard.
It is my desire to establish more firmly our understanding and relationships with the Latin American countries by strengthening the diplomatic missions to those countries.
It is my hope to secure men long experienced in our Diplomatic Service, who speak the languages of the peoples to whom they are accredited, as chiefs of our diplomatic missions in these States.
I shall send to the Senate at an early date the nominations of several such men.
The Congress has by numerous wise and foresighted acts in the past few years greatly strengthened the character of our representation abroad.
It has made liberal provision for the establishment of suitable quarters for our foreign staffs in the different countries.
In order, however, that we may further develop the most effective force in this, one of the most responsible functions of our Government, I shall recommend to the Congress more liberal appropriations for the work of the State Department.
I know of no expenditure of public money from which a greater economic and moral return can come to us than by assuring the most effective conduct of our foreign relations.
NATIONAL DEFENSE To preserve internal order and freedom from encroachment is the first purpose of government.
Our Army and Navy are being maintained in a most efficient state under officers of high intelligence and zeal.
The extent and expansion of their numbers and equipment as at present authorized are ample for this purpose.
We can well be deeply concerned, however, at the growing expense.
From a total expenditure for national defense purposes in 1914 of $267,000,000, it naturally rose with the Great War, but receded again to $612,000,000 in 1924, when again it began to rise until during the current fiscal year the expenditures will reach to over $730,000,000, excluding all civilian services of those departments.
Programs now authorized will carry it to still larger figures in future years.
While the remuneration paid to our soldiers and sailors is justly at a higher rate than that of any other country in the world, and while the cost of subsistence is higher, yet the total of our expenditures is in excess of those of the most highly militarized nations of the world.
Upon the conference shortly to be held in London will depend such moderation as we can make in naval expenditure.
If we shall be compelled to undertake the naval construction implied in the Washington arms treaty as well as other construction which would appear to be necessary if no international agreement can be completed, we shall be committed during the next six years to a construction expenditure of upward of $1,200,000,000 besides the necessary further increase in costs for annual upkeep.
After 1914 the various Army contingents necessarily expanded to the end of the Great War and then receded to the low point in 1924, when expansion again began.
In 1914 the officers and men in our regular forces, both Army and Navy, were about 164,000, in 1924 there were about 256,000, and in 1929 there were about 250,000.
Our citizens' army, however, including the National Guard and other forms of reserves, increase these totals up to about 299,000 in 1914, about 672,000 in 1924, and about 728,000 in 1929.
Under the Kellogg pact we have undertaken never to use war as an instrument of national policy.
We have, therefore, undertaken by covenant to use these equipments solely for defensive purposes.
From a defense point of view our forces should be proportioned to national need and should, therefore, to some extent be modified by the prospects of peace, which were never brighter than to-day.
It should be borne in mind that the improvement in the National Guard by Federal support begun in 1920 has definitely strengthened our national security by rendering them far more effective than ever heretofore.
The advance of aviation has also greatly increased our effectiveness in defense.
In addition to the very large program of air forces which we are maintaining in the Army and Navy, there has been an enormous growth of commercial aviation.
This has provided unanticipated reserves in manufacturing capacity and in industrial and air personnel, which again adds to our security.
I recommend that Congress give earnest consideration to the possibilities of prudent action which will give relief from our continuously mounting expenditures.
FINANCES OF THE GOVERNMENT The finances of the Government are in sound condition.
I shall submit the detailed evidences and the usual recommendations in the special Budget message.
I may, however, summarize our position.
The public debt on June 30 this year stood at $16,931,000,000, compared to the maximum in August, 1919, of $26,596,000,000.
Since June 30 it has been reduced by a further $238,000,000.
In the Budget to be submitted the total appropriations recommended for the fiscal year 1931 are $3,830,445,231, as compared to $3,976,141,651 for the present fiscal year.
The present fiscal year, however, includes $150,000,000 for the Federal Farm Board, as to which no estimate can as yet be determined for 1931.
Owing to the many necessary burdens assumed by Congress in previous years which now require large outlays, it is with extreme difficulty that we shall be able to keep the expenditures for the next fiscal year within the bounds of the present year.
Economies in many directions have permitted some accommodation of pressing needs, the net result being an increase, as shown above, of about one-tenth of 1 per cent above the present fiscal year.
We can not fail to recognize the obligations of the Government in support of the public welfare but we must coincidentally bear in mind the burden of taxes and strive to find relief through some tax reduction.
Every dollar so returned fertilizes the soil of prosperity.
TAX REDUCTION The estimate submitted to me by the Secretary of the Treasury and the Budget Director indicates that the Government will close the fiscal year 1930 with a surplus of about $225,000,000 and the fiscal year 1931 with a surplus of about $123,000,000.
Owing to unusual circumstances, it has been extremely difficult to estimate future revenues with accuracy.
I believe, however, that the Congress will be fully justified in giving the benefits of the prospective surpluses to the taxpayers, particularly as ample provision for debt reduction has been made in both years through the form of debt retirement from ordinary revenues.
In view of the uncertainty in respect of future revenues and the comparatively small size of the indicated surplus in 1931, relief should take the form of a provisional revision of tax rates.
I recommend that the normal income tax rates applicable to the incomes of individuals for the calendar year 1929 be reduced from 5, 3, and 1 ½ per cent, to 4, 2, and ½ per cent, and that the tax on the income of corporations for the calendar year 1929 be reduced from 12 to 11 per cent.
It is estimated that this will result in a reduction of $160,000,000 in income taxes to be collected during the calendar year 1930.
The loss in revenue will be divided approximately equally between the fiscal years 1930 and 1931.
Such a program will give a measure of tax relief to the maximum number of taxpayers, with relatively larger benefits to taxpayers with small or moderate incomes.
FOREIGN DEBTS The past year has brought us near to completion of settlements of the indebtedness of foreign governments to the United States.
The act of Congress approved February 4, 1929, authorized the settlement with the Government of Austria along lines similar to the terms of settlement offered by that Government to its other relief creditors.
No agreement has yet been concluded with that government, but the form of agreement has been settled and its execution only awaits the Government of Austria securing the assent by all the other relief creditors of the terms offered.
The act of Congress approved February 14, 1929, authorized the settlement with the Government of Greece, and an agreement was concluded on May 10, 1929.
The Government of France ratified the agreement with us on July 27, 1929.
This agreement will shortly be before the Congress and I recommend its approval.
The only indebtedness of foreign governments to the United States now unsettled is that of Russia and Armenia.
During the past year a committee of distinguished experts under American leadership submitted a plan looking to a revision of claims against Germany by the various Governments.
The United States denied itself any participation in the war settlement of general reparations and our claims are comparatively small in amount.
They arise from costs of the army of occupation and claims of our private citizens for losses under awards from the Mixed Claims Commission established under agreement with the German Government.
In finding a basis for settlement it was necessary for the committee of experts to request all the Governments concerned to make some contribution to the adjustment and we have felt that we should share a proportion of the concessions made.
The State and Treasury Departments will be in a position shortly to submit for your consideration a draft of an agreement to be executed between the United States and Germany providing for the payments of these revised amounts.
A more extensive statement will be submitted at that time.
The total amount of indebtedness of the various countries to the United States now funded is $11,579,465,885.
This sum was in effect provided by the issue of United States Government bonds to our own people.
The payments of the various Governments to us on account of principal and interest for 1930 are estimated at a total of about $239,000,000, for 1931 at about $236,000,000, for 1932 at about $246,000,000.
