THIS is a period of changing emphasis in the work of this department.
Some of the great bureaus, particularly the Bureau of Pensions and the General Land Office, have overtaken the peak of their administrative load under existing legislation.
Other bureaus, such as the Geological Survey and the Bureau of Reclamation, have ahead of them large tasks for completion.
One activity, that of the Indian Service, has before it a definite and unique goal that of working itself out of a job.
Its program calls for a large economic saving to the country by increased present expenditures to enable the Indian population to eventually become self-supporting.
On the other hand, the National Park Service and the Office of Education look forward to constantly increasing fields of activity.
The Territorial administration of Hawaii and Alaska is vested in this department and their problems present an expanding opportunity.
The work of this department and its component organizations embraces a more diversified field than that of other Government departments.
The public domain, water power, oil, pensions, the work of mapping the country, reclamation of arid lands, the national parks, the Government's part in the educational work of the country, care of the persons and property of over 350,000 Indians, contact with two great Territories and the administration of four eleemosynary institutions and six collateral activitiesthese all bring their varied problems into one administrative area.
The correlation of their work, establishment of a proper perspective on their various interests and finanial requirements, and the establishment of major policies devolve upon the Secretary of the Interior.
The morale of the men and women of this department is on a constantly rising plane.
At the head of each bureau there is now a man enthusiastic about his work and upon whom rests the responsibility for having his bureau function.
The same efficiency and initiative will be expected of their subordinates as would be the case in a commercial organization and, so far as legal and financial restrictions will permit, recognition and advancement will be based upon the same standards.
This department is organized on a basis whereby, with but few exceptions, the administrative unit is a division or a branch responsible to a bureau chief, styled commissioner or director.
These, in turn, are responsible to either the First Assistant Secretary, the Assistant Secretary, the solicitor, or the chief clerk.
The department embarks on the coming year with some changes in its personnel.
In recognition of the increasing importance of the legal questions coming before the department, Mr. Edward C. Finney, First Assistant Secretary, a lawyer of unparalleled experience in the administration of the public land laws, was asked to assume the responsibilities of the solicitor for the department, and now occupies that post.
Former Governor and Senator Joseph M. Dixon, of Montana, was appointed to the office of First Assistant Secretary.
His experience in western problems and in Washington legislation and administration have fitted him for his present supervision over the Bureau of Reclamation, the Geological Survey, and the Indian Service.
John H. Edwards continues as Assistant Secretary.
His responsibilities include the Territories, the Office of Education, the National Park Service.
There have been important changes in the leadership of the bureaus.
Death brought one of them.
Former Gov. William Spry, of Utah, Commissioner of the General Land Office, died at his post.
His faithful administration of the General Land Office under three administrations entitled him to a high place in the records of this department; the respect held for him by his associates and the affection he commanded among the men and women whom he led have not been surpassed in this department.
He was succeeded by former Gov. C. C. Moore, of Idaho.
Ill health, occasioned largely by self-sacrificing devotion to his work, necessitated another change when Stephen T. Mather tendered his resignation as Director of the National Park Service after nearly 12 years' service.
He was succeeded by Horace M. Albright, one of his associates, superintendent of Yellowstone National Park, and Assistant Director of the Park Service.
In regretfully accepting Director Mather's resignation, Secretary West expressed the debt of gratitude owed tc him by the Nation for his years of self-sacrificing and constructive service.
I was associated with Mr. Mather in some activities, and I am pleased to join Secretary West's appraisal of his achievements.
The Bureau of Pensions, upon termination of the service of Col. Winfield Scott as commissioner, passed under the jurisdiction of Col. Earl D. Church, whose experience in insurance administration affords a sound basis for formulating the policies of that bureau.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Charles H. Burke, resigned after a period of service extending over a longer time than that of any predecessor and including some of the most difficult stages of Indian administration.
His work was courageous and energetic.
The drafting into service of Charles J. Rhoads, of Philadelphia, in collaboration with William J. Scattergood, as assistant comnissioner, marks the beginning of a new period.
Both are men of large business experience whose interest in the Indian has extended over many years.
They sacrificed personal interests to accept a large responsibility.
The governorship of Hawaii passed with the resignation of Wallace R. Farrington to Lawrence M. Judd.
The prosperity of the island is reflected in its annual report, an abstract of which is given in another part of this report, and which testifies to the efficiency of Governor Farrington's administration.
George A. Parks continues his effective administration as Governor of Alaska, with O. F. Ohlson as general manager of the Alaska Railroad.
The Bureau of Reclamation remains under the direction of Commissioner Elwood Mead, who is charged with the task of building Boulder Dam.
The Geological Survey continues under the leadership of Director George Otis Smith.
The Commissioner of Education is William John Cooper, who took office upon the resignation of John J. Tigert, during the prior administration.
Ebert K. Burlew continues as Administrative Assistant and Northcutt Ely as Executive Assistant to the Secretary.
Ernest Walker Sawyer, Executive Assistant, will transfer his association to the Alaska Railroad in an executive capacity.
W. Bertrand Acker continues as chief clerk, a position for which his long administrative experience qualifies him.
Save for the national forests and some reservations, the public domain comprises in its limits the last of our nationally owned resources.
Correlation of conservation of these national resources with the welfare of the people living in the public-land States presents a problem engaging the activities of five of this department's bureaus: The General Land Office, the Office of Indian Affairs, the Geological Survey, the Bureau of Reclamation, and the National Park Service.
With the exception of the Office of Indian Affairs, the future of the public domain rests in the wise direction of the activities of these bureaus.
As most of the public domain lies in arid or semiarid regions, the principal problem is one of water conservation, and the solution of this problem in the arid regions carries with it a large part of the fate of the cultivated areas lying in the same watersheds.
The problem is not one solely of reclamation but of protection against erosion on unreclaimed watersheds.
Water conservation may properly rank first in the administration of the public domain, because of its importance in the everyday lives of the people in these States; but equally imperative from the national viewpoint is the necessity for wise use of the mineral resources, principally petroleum, which still remain within Federal jurisdiction.
Those who depend upon the regular rains of the summer have.no conception of irrigation and its peculiar responsibilities.
It demands communal living and thinking and peaceful conditions for people to join in together to finance and maintain large water-distributing systems.
Even the control of the flow of water from a single ditch demands rigid cooperation and fair play.
From Nebraska west, water, and water alone, is the key to our future.
We need the mountains and the hills and a great protective back country or we can not have sufficient water for our valleys.
The cooperation and fair play that have made possible the successes of individual reclamation undertakings must be extended to the larger problem.
Homestead thinking must be replaced with watershed thinking.
There must be a great western strategy for the protection of our watersheds and the plant life on them, however undesirable and unimportant some of it may seem to be.
A cactus or sage brush that has fought its way to maturity against drought plays its part in furthering rainfall and in stopping soil erosion.
Overgrazing by sharp-nosed animals cuts down the plant life, increases erosion, buries water holes, increases flood damage, and is harmful to water conservation.
Plants hold the snow and the rain, prevent rapid run-off and soil erosion, and build a balanced set of natural conditions, which can only be broken at the peril of those bringing it about.
The public domain has been abused, overgrazed, and not respected in many sections of the country.
Unless we care for the lands now in possession of the United States, in forests and public domain, the West will repeat the degradation of Korea and parts of China with man-made barrenness, floods, erosion, and decay.
We must stop thinking in terms of immediate production in viewing much of the public land of to-day.
The forests must be protected or harvested constructively, overgrazing must be stopped, and experts in plant life and water conservation must be our guides.
It is difficult to understand and properly control such problems from Washington.
These considerations have made the Presidential appointment of a commission to study the public lands question, under the chairmanship of former Secretary Garfield, essential and timely.
This commission will consider the question of desirability of transfer to the State governments of the remaining unappropriated unreserved public lands for school purposes, thus placing these lands under State administration.
These unappropriated lands now total about 190,000,000 acres.
The public lands embraced in about 10,000,000 acres, withdrawn as stock watering places and for stock drives, might also be subject to transfer.
In addition the surface rights of about 35,000,000 acres of coal and shale reserves should also be eligible.
The grazing value of all these lands has steadily decreased, due to overgrazing.
Their deterioration will necessarily ultimately affect the water supply through destruction of the soil.
This loss is in addition to.
The trees, grass, and desert growth essential to the preservation of the soil know nothing about the jurisdiction charged with their protection.
The problem is not a theoretical one of whether the Federal or State Gowernment should administer them but a practical one of whether local understanding or distant direction shall be the controlling factor.
The States have already shown their capacity to handle school lands ceded to them.
The President's proposal does not include such forest, park, Indian, and similar reservations as have a national, as well as local, importance.
With regard to mineral rights, inasmuch as the great bulk of revenues collected by the United States revert to the States, either directly or through the reclamation fund, and inasmuch as Federal expenditures for the Geological Survey and similar organizations for the development of the mineral resources and the public domain have far exceeded the Government's proportion of receipts, no hardship will result to the States from the continued administration of these national assets by the National Government.
Reclamation is but one phase of the problem of water conservation.
It is generally agreed that the engineering undertakings of the Bureau of Reclamation have been soundly conceived and well carried out.
But the problem is broader than its engineering phases.
This country has produced too much of some kinds of food and with the industrialization and urbanization of a growing percentage of our people there has also been a shift in the type of foods eaten.
This, together with a greater productiveness of favored areas with the help of better seed, better methods, and more machinery, has increased the amount of so-called marginal lands where the farmer's life is a struggle against heavy odds.
I know of no more painful act than to place a man and particularly his wife on a piece of land where they are foreordained to a prolonged agonizing failure.
The economics of a new farm project must be essentially sound or a social crime is in prospect.
Economic surveys, recently made under the direction of the Bureau of Reclamation, have been of value.
Reclamation has been a sound policy of the National Government; to continue so, under changing conditions, will require some changes in view and increased emphasis upon the economic aspects of new projects.
The President has expressed a desire to see a recasting of the activities of the Reclamation Service with reference to new projects in view of the diminishing ratio of public domain to privately owned lands in possible future irrigation projects.
The proposal is to carry Government participation only to the building of dams and waterstorage works and thereupon transfer the works to the States for development of distribution systems without obligation for repayment, except such revenue as may arise from electrical power and, in some cases, from the sale of water.
This problem also will come before the new public lands commission for study and I propose to cooperate with it to this end.
Administration of established projects would not, of course, be affected.
Conservation of the Nation's remaining mineral resources presents a problem in administration of the public domain second only to the conservation of water.
Petroleum is our fastest-dwindling irreplaceable asset.
It is acknowledged that there is considerable preventable waste in the handling of our oil supplies.
This is due to the waste of gas and oil, the use of gasoline-containing crude oils in other than gasoline engines, the large amounts left in, the ground because of badly managed attacks upon the pools, and wastage fron evaporation due to expensive storage above ground.
It is also acknowledged that there is a limitel supply of oil available.
Estimates vary but those most expert in the field expect our present volume of production to last for less than a decade.
This situation, in view of the proportionately small known petroleum areas still controlled by the United States, presents squarely to the Government the problem of wise use of this remaining supply.
Primarily, the responsibility for the prevention of waste lies with the industry and with the governments of the States.
That problem is far from solution.
The position of the Federal Government is not to interfere with the rights and duties of the local State governments but to lend such aid as it can and to participate in the solution of the problems.
Voluntary cooperation in the industry and wise exercise of the police power by the States must be the basis for conservation.
Until the present day of wasteful overproduction is over the potential supply in the public domain must be safeguarded.
With that need in view, the issuance of prospecting permits has ceased and extensions of existing permits have been granted only upon a showing of equities.
Unsound exploitation of the public domain under oil prospecting permits has, in some cases, been shocking.
Although the law allows two years within which very moderate drilling requirements may be met, and provides for extensions thereafter up to a possible total of nine years, an examination of the outstanding permits, occasioned by the President's conservation order, has so far disclosed that, up to November 15, 10,995 of these permits required cancellation for lack of diligence out of approximately 20,300 outstanding.
They have been largely held for speculative purposes and some have been used as a basis of blue-sky operations.
The ratio of these frozen permits to the total outstanding has amounted to about 50 per cent, representing prima facie noncompliance with the law to that extent.
No permit which has been regarded as sufficiently, valuable by its holder to justify compliance with the law has been affected by this order.
The total area of active permits will probably not exceed 10,000,000 acres upon which genuine development is now in progress, as against 40,000,000 acres covered by permits before this housecleaning was undertaken.
The public domain is being rapidly cleared of these abuses.
A method of review has been provided whereby all alleged equities under permits are considered by a departmental committee.
Up to November 15, 1,512 cases had come before the committee and 1,282 of these had received favorable action.
There are several thousand similar cases under review, awaiting decision.
Very careful consideration will continue to be given to equities, particularly legitimate development and reliable geological investigations.
That the cessation of issuance of prospecting permits has no immediate prospect of injuring the oil industry of any of the States affected is apparent when it is considered that in the seven major public land oil States of Wyoming, Utah, Idaho, Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, and California, the number of wells completed to production on public lands in all of 1928 and the first half of 1929 amounted to 249, whereas on March 12, 1929, the date of the conservation order, there were shut-in wells in those States totaling 4,115.
The great disproportion of these figures is occasioned by the situation in California where new wells on the public lands for the year and a half ending July 1, totaled 71 wells, whereas the shut-in wells on all the lands of the State on March 12 totaled 3,560.
But shut-in wells outnumbered new public land wells in every one of these States except New Mexico.
In the absence of a need for production from new wells, as evidenced by these figures, further exploitation of the public domain at the present time means overproduction and consequent further wastage of an irreplaceable resource.
An example of the department's policy may be found in its handling of the Kettleman Hills oil-field problem in California.
That field's three domes include an area of 145 square miles, contain 49 square miles of Government-owned land.
The initial production from the discovery well and an offset well indicates a tremendous potential production of very high-grade oil.
Wastage of gas from the discovery well alone amounted to over 70,000,000 cubic feet per day, more than enough to supply all northern California.
Drilling was proceeding on more than 20 wells prior to any adequate provision for utilization of the escaping gas and during a period when gasoline was not needed.
Following some months of negotiation, the department was successful, through the efforts of Director George Otis Smith, of the Geological Survey, in concluding an agreement between its permittees indorsed by the adjoining private landowners whereby production will be restricted to a minimum in this field for two years and a well-nigh catastrophic waste of gasoline and gas avoided.
The time has come when conservation of the Nation's oil resources must be regarded as a national strategy to be settled by agreement of interests across the table top, rather than by conflict thousands of feet under the ground.
Mishandling of a great exhaustible national resource will stand out more and more clearly as the supplies are diminished.
The diminishing character of these supplies makes this a time of peculiar responsibility in their administration.
The present conservation policy will be continued.
The General Land Office is the administrative agency in direct charge of the public domain, although other bureaus of the department have an active part in its administration.
Under the leadership of the late Gov. William Spry, it had an energetic and efficient period of activity.
A summary of the vast volume of work handled by the General Land Office will be found in another part of this report, and comments upon its future policies are included in the discussion of the future of the public domain.
The gradual taking up of the public lands of the country has caused a proportionate decline in the volume of its business but not in the character of its administration.
The work of the Geological Survey illustrates another of the phases of this department related to the public domain which make the future of public lands its major responsibility.
On March 21 the survey celebrated its fiftieth anniversary.
The appropriations for its work have increased from $100,000 in the year 1880 to over $2,000,000 for the fiscal year 1930.
It has before it the outstanding and highly imperative task of completion of the topographic map of the United States.
Increased expenditures over a limited period will be a real saving to the United States as compared to slower progress under lesser appropriations.
The Geological Survey is a fine example of the proper place of science in Government business.
The geologist with his trained mind has made a study of that part of this continent in our possession.
The work of thousands of trained men, an exceptional part of them young men, has aided the mineral development of this country to an extent which has never been properly acknowledged.
Member.
I expect to see its activities strengthened and its work enlarged by increased funds and increased emphasis within the department.
Its force comprises more than 500 highly trained men at work in making comprehensive surveys of our coal, oil, phosphates, potash, metalliferous ores, making topographical surveys, doing stream gaging, investigating underground water supplies, and engaging in research into many related subjects.
This work is of outstanding value to the public-land States.
The work of this bureau on the public domain would not be replaceable by any State agency, and this, in connection with its large outlays, constitutes a strong reason for reservation of mineral rights from any transfer of public domain made to the States.
This is true particularly in view of the fact that the Government's revenue from these minerals reverts in any event to the States, either directly or through the reclamation fund, in large part.
This department encounters hydroelectric-power problems in two capacities; first, in its administration of reclamation projects and Boulder Dam; and, second, by reason of the Secretary's position on the Federal Power Commission.
As to the latter class, the activities of the department will be directed toward hearty cooperation with the power commission.
As to the former class, a policy will be followed which will insulate the United States as completely as may be from interference with local interests and regulation.
It is my belief that the proper office of the United States ends with the construction of dams and incidental structures for primarily Federal purposes only, such as navigation control, flood relief, reclamation, etc.
That policy is being followed in working out the many problems attendant on Boulder Dam.
Under the direction of the Commissioner of Reclamation, Doctor Mead, engineering plans are progressing in a satisfactory manner, with the assistance of an augmented field force.
An advisory group of experts on electrical engineering and plant management is functioning and has collaborated with the bureau in determining the financial basis on which the power shall be marketed.
Work on the dam will be begun as soon as adequate contracts have been negotiated and congressional appropriations made.
Charles J. Rhoads, the new Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and William J. Scattergood, Assistant Commissioner, left large business interests to enter public service.
They face a problem that has remainded practically without adequate solution for the past 100 years.
Under their direction a start will be made toward its solution.
The fundamental aim of the Indian Service will be to make the Indian a self-supporting and self-respecting citizen as rapidly as it can be brought about.
He will be considered a potential citizen, instead of the ward of the Government.
Leadership, rather than custody, is the object.
Full responsibility for himself is essential to his success.
Indian stock is of excellent quality and can merge with that of the Nation.
To accomplish these ends it will be necessary to revise the Indian educational program along practical lines and to perfect plans for absorption of the Indian into the industrial and agricultural life of the Nation.
The decentralization of the activities of the bureau will be effected as rapidly as possible.
Problems of health and education should, as soon as possible, become responsibilities of the various States.
Pending that change, vigorous emphasis will be placed upon these two factors in seeking Federal appropriations.
The Office of Education will be asked to collaborate in supervision of Indian education and the health problem should eventually be lodged with the Public Health Service.
The new policy can be characterized briefly as meaning a new deal for the young Indian and a square deal for the old Indian.
It will have as its objective the placing of the Indian and his property upon a normal basis and the elimination of the Indian Bureau within a period of 25 years.
In the past the tendency has been to confuse two distinct governmental responsibilities, that of wardship over the Indian's person and wardship over his property.
The white man, wanting wholesome food, a comfortable place to live in, opportunities for education and advancement, has a single way of getting them.
He works for them.
The Indian has often failed to satisfy those same needs because he has not learned the way to competence and happiness through work.
Industrial training for young Indians and adequate mechanism for inducting them into the industrial life of the Nation is essential.
It is an unsound policy to assume as in the past that their means of livelihood should necessarily be agriculture.
Originally a nomadic race, the Indians, faced by pressure of white population, went to isolated places or were forced into them by military power.
These once isolated areas, now surrounded by white civilization, have.remained islands unmerged with the life about them.
They are reminiscent of a period that is past.
The Indians' original status was that of hostages and prisoners.
They have remained an insoluble and isolated element of the population.
There will be many difficulties and, in some instances, it may not be desirable to bring about a complete merger between the white and Indian civilization.
The Indian culture will be preserved where it has the means of subsistence and the vigor to survive, as demonstrated in some areas in the Southwest.
As this modern civilization calls for a higher degree of mechanical ability, the Indian naturally skillful with his hands can find a self-supporting place.
The problem of making a section of the population numbering between 350,000 and 400,000 selfsupporting can be and will be solved.
The problem has not been solved before largely because of the lack of resources in the attack upon it.
For example, in examining the expenditures of 22 Indian schools for the fiscal year 1929, it was found that the average expenditure for clothing per year per pupil was $22.26, against a minimum requirement of at least $50.
As to diet, the average per pupil per day, even under the last allowances available, was con: siderably below the 37.8 cents found to be the minimum requirement by a carefully selected committee of physicians anid specialists.
The actual figures for food per pupil per day in these 22 schools was 20 cents, of which 14 cents represented food purchased and 6 cents represented food produced.
Examination of these figures should indicate one reason why the health of the Indian population is not up to white standards.
The Board of Indian Commissioners is an independent organization dissociated from the Indian Service and acting in an advisory capacity to the President and the Secretary.
Its work has been valuable and enlightening.
A summary of its current activities will be found in another part of this report.
Attention is particularly called to its full report published separately which contains a valuable review of the entire period of Indian administration.
The plan of reorganization of the Qffice of Education has been completed and is in process of execution.
Its principle is the establishment of the Office of Education as a research organization rather than an administrative agency.
It will transfer to other agencies its present administrative activities so far as possible and concentrate on fact finding and research in the many fields of education.
In the past it has been the administrator of the educational system of Alaska.
As rapidly as may be that responsibility should be transferred to other agencies more local to Alaska.
It has, through an anomalous development, become the custodian of the Alaskan reindeer through its efforts to assist the Alaskan natives to become selfsupporting.
Care of the reindeer will be transferred to more appropriate channels.
The energies of the office will thus be devoted to its: proper functions of investigation and publication of data designed to be of assistance to local authorities in proving school standards.
It will have an administrative division, under a chief clerk; a.
Known in the past as a bureau, its.
Hereafter it will be known as the Office of Education.
The work of the advisory committee on education is one of the most important with which the Office of Education is currently associated.
This advisory committee is made up of a number of the most prominent educators of the United States.
Its work will be to make an exhaustive and authoritative study of the activities of the Federal Government in the field of education.
It is made up of men of experience and individuality, and nearly every school of thought regarding this problem is represented.
Its work should be of the greatest importance in shaping the future trend of the Office of Education and in forming a basis for recommendations to Congress.
The cooperation of those invited to serve on this committee has been gratifying.
Independently, a nation-wide survey of secondary education is now in progress under a three-year appropriation program.
The results of this survey will be of great value in presenting to the country the facts of this phase of education.
Local government in education is, in my opinion, the keystone of proper training for citizenship by universal public education.
A unique distribution of the taxing power, so that the majority of the taxes have been raised and spent in the local districts and States :and only a modest percentage outside of those for war and its after effects has come from the Washington Government, has permitted a'wide range of development in the public schools.
There have, fortunately, been no national universities.
State universities developed after a prolonged period of privately operated and later privately endowed institutions of higher learning.
These private institutions have provided a constant stimulation for State institutions of equal rank.
The hand of centralized government has been largely kept off the school-teacher and the schoolroom.
In some areas absence of a proper sense of self-government, financial disability, and a lack of organizing power have provided some dark spots.
A suggestion has been frequently made that a national mechanism should be set up to bring these dark spots up to the average level of the country.
Correction of abuses is a poor method of administration.
There is a distinct menace in the centralization in the National Government of any large educational scheme.
Abnormal power to standardize and crystallize education which would accompany financial power would be more damaging to local aspiration and local self-respect and to State government and State self-respect than any assistance that might come from the funds.
We can not rise higher than our source.
That source in government with us is local.
There is a distinct place for research and the dissemination of information in the administrative side of education in the National Government but it should not be recognized as an administrative position with large funds at its disposal.
A department of education similar to the other departments of the Government is not required.
An adequate position for education within a department and with sufficient financial support for its research, survey, and other work, is all that is needed.
That is the aim of the newly reorganized Office of Education and that will be its position in this department.
The office will give increasing attention to the possibilities of the use of radio in education.
To that end a series of conferences have been organized and are proving of value.
The radio constitutes an entirely new force, giving practically continent-wide range to the voice and the musical instrument and, hence, to lectures and features not otherwise available to rural classrooms.
It seems inevitable that great use must be found for the radio in our public educational system.
It will render it possible to choose the most expert lecturers and to have their audiences in many places—homes and classrooms instead of one hall.
It has been used until recently largely for entertainment and amusement, but is passing out of that stage into that of community and domestic utility.
Its possibilities in the field of education will be closely followed by the Office of Education and its use furthered through consideration by the Radio Education Conference.
The Pension Bureau, under the direction of Col. Earl D. Church, will be based as far as possible on sound insurance principles.
A high grade of medical service is demanded.
Many important individual decisions involving substantial amounts of money must be made and they should be based largely upon the physical findings of the medical staff.
The large problem of handling the pension affairs of those having proper places on the rolls through their declining years needs to be carried out with sympathy and efficiency, both from a human and a financial standpoint.
The aims of the Pension Office will be honesty, fairness, justice, and promptness.
It is particularly important to eliminate all elements of fraud.
Help will be given to those who have rendered the requisite service to their country, but there is every reason for not bringing in among those so honored and helped any who are not deserving.
A sound economical basis which will operate with justice to all concerned will be the aim of Colonel Church and his associates.
Experience in the insurance field will be a splendid starting point for maturing plans to that end, and for administration of the civil service retirement laws, for which the bureau is responsible.
Plans are also in process of formulation for practical coordination in the field between the efforts of the Pension Bureau, the Veterans' Bureau, and the National Soldiers' Home, looking to an elimination of overlaps and duplications in administrative work.
The magnitude of the bureau's work may be judged from its disbursements for the past year totaling $229,889,986.48.
The basis for disbursement is largely statutory, but as these statutes are founded in a large part on recommendations of the bureau the importance of sound plans for the future as a basis for recommendations to Congress is apparent.
In dealing with national parks, the efforts of the department will be concentrated on three principal efforts: First, the high standards for scenic and recreational values established by the present parks must be met by any new park projects; second, rounding out the national park system by bringing some new carefully selected parks into the system, by bringing under its jurisdiction the national military parks, and by adding desirable areas to existing parks; third, the consolidation of park areas by elimination of private holdings within their boundaries.
In visiting the parks I have found the personnel of this young and vigorous bureau one of the most valuable contact groups between the Federal Government and the people.
It has taken its place as a major bureau and should be classified as such.
The road and trail program is being energetically carried out.
Five million dollars a year for this purpose is the present appropria-, tion.
A 10-year program has been drawn up and is being followed.
It contemplates reconstruction of existing roads on modern standards and the construction of certain new roads and improvement and extension of the trail system.
Large areas in the parks are to be left in their natural wilderness state, accessible only by trail on foot or horseback.
An excellent example is Glacier National Park.
I have seen no reason to modify this plan in order to open new country in the older and highly developed parks like Yellowstone and Yosemite.
Preservation of primitive landscape conditions, adequate protection of wild life, and the safeguarding of forests and watersheds can not be carried out if a reasonable balance between accessibility and wilderness value is not maintained.
A group of landscape architects pass on all plans for improvements in the park system and roads and trails are built according to designs that will give the least injury to natural features.
The public-utility operators are cooperating in this field.
The Park Service faces splendid opportunities in new fields of public education as well as along its present lines.
It now serves 3,000,000 people annually.
I have asked that a careful survey be made of the rates and returns of the various utilities operating in the parks to the end that a fair balance between service and profit may continue to be struck.
No legal organization with which I have had contact can exhibit a more impressive record of business done than the office of the solicitor of this department.
During the past year 36,172 matters were handled and only 975 remained unfinished at the close of the year.
A table appears in another part of this report indicating the character of work handled.
Summaries of the reports of the Governor of Alaska and the Governor of Hawaii will' be found in a later part of this report.
In Alaska the problem is one of proper correlation between the work of the Territory and that of the Federal Government.
An endeavor will be made to simplify the Department of the Interior's part in Federal administration by transfer of some of its activities under the act of February 20, 1927 (44 Stat. 1068), to the Alaska Board of Commissioners, which consists of the governor, representing the Department of the Interior, a representative of the Department of Commerce, and a representative of the Agriculture Department.
Such transferred activities will include supervision of the reindeer herds.
The Office of Education's district supervisor is being transferred to Alaska from Seattle and will be responsible to this commission instead of to the Office of Education.
In the past the Office of Education has administered the affairs of the Metlakatla colony on Annette Island.
An endeavor will be made to work out a proper system of cooperation between the office, the Territory, and local organizations in freeing the office of this administrative burden.
One of the problems of Alaskan administration has been the Alaska Railroad, with its large annual deficit.
An effort will be made to aid in the establishment of industries whose traffic may benefit this road, particularly by exploitation of great possibilities offered by Alaska's reindeer herds as a meat supply and by development of the Territory's coal fields.
Hawaii's Territorial organization is such that its administrative contacts with the department, aside from financial supervision, are comparatively few.
The department can be of assistance in the cooperation of its bureaus with the Territorial government and in closer contact to that end.
Among the department's bureaus active in Hawaii are the National Park Service, which administers the Hawaii National Park, and the Geological Survey, which conducts volcanologic and seismologic observations at Mauna Loa and Kilauea.
This department administers 3 eleemosynary institutions in the city of Washington: Freedmen's Hospital, whose work is primarily devoted to colored patients; St. Elizabeths Hospital, handling mental cases; Howard University, a college for negroes; and in a measure looks after the Columbia Institution for the Deaf, an independent institution.
Summaries of the work of these institutions appear separately in this report.
Their work is larger than is generally recognized.
St. Elizabeths cared for 4,899 patients during the year.
The Columbia Institution for the Deaf cared for 129 men and women, and Howard University for 2,671 negro students.
Freedmen's Hospital gave care to 4,033 indoor patients.
Endeavor will be made to more closely correlate the work of these institutions with that of the department and to afford them such assistance as may be available by the department's bureaus.
Attention is directed in another part of this report to the work of the departmental archæologist, the General Education Board, the Fuel Administration records, and the Perry's Victory Memorial Commission.
These are independent activities reporting formally to the Secretary of the Interior.
Reports of the Territories and of each of the bureaus and independent organizations are published separately, and for full information their reports may be referred to.
The following is a statement of the matters received and disposed of in the Office of the Solicitor during the fiscal year ended June 30,.
The'foregoing does not include a large number of miscellaneous matters of which no formal record is kept, nor does it show the numerous hearings, oral consideration, and personal interviews relating to important business which came before the office.
During the year 21 suits in which the department was involved, and which are being defended by this office, were instituted in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia.
A number of the suits grew out of the passage by Congress of the act approved February 13, 1929 (45 Stat. 1166), providing for a review by the courts of questions of law involved in the denial by the Secretary of the Interior of claims for losses filed under the war minerals relief act of March 2, 1919 (40 Stat. 1274), and its amendments.
It is expected that more than 300 cases will be filed during the limit of one year fixed by the act.
Suits have been filed to test the authority of the Secretary of the Interior exercised by him in connection with the policy of the President to conserve Government-owned oil and gas deposits.
On June 30, 1928, the number of cases pending in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia in which the department was involved was 15.
As heretofore stated 21 new suits were filed during the last fiscal year.
Of the 36 cases thus pending 6 were disposed of, leaving 30 pending.
In the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia six cases were pending at the beginning of the year.
During the year 4 appeals were filed and 5 disposed of, leaving 5 appeals pending.
Two petitions for writs of certiorari on behalf of the department were filed in the Supreme Court of the United States, both of which were granted and are now pending in that court.
One of them, known as the Krushnic case, involves the construction of the law upon which depends the disposition of a large area of oil-shale lands.
The right of the applicants to acquire such lands was denied by the department, which prevailed in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, but its decision was reversed by the Court of Appeals.
The other case involves the right of many claimants to participate in the distribution of the annual income accruing to a fund belonging to the Chippewa Indians of Minnesota.
A third petition for certiorari opposed by the department was denied.
Receipts and expenditures.
The total cash receipts from sales, leases, and other disposition of public lands (including receipts from copies of records, sales of Government property, etc.) were $5,654,435, and from sales and leases of Indian lands, $539,531.33, an aggregate of $6,193,966.33, all of which was deposited in the Treasury.
Five per cent of the net proceeds from cash sales of public lands is paid to the public-land States within which such sales were made, and the balance of such net receipts from States named in the reclamation act, together with the net receipts from fees and commissions from these States, is credited to the reclamation fund; 90 per cent of the receipts under the mineral leasing act (exclusive of receipts from lands within naval petroleum reserves) is divided between the States from which the minerals (principally oil) were taken and the reclamation fund (371/2 per cent to the States and 52½/ per cent to the reclamation fund); the receipts from sales of reclamation town sites and camp sites and rentals and royalties from potash leases are credited to the reclamation fund; approximately 85 per cent of receipts from sales of land and timber in the forfeited Oregon and California railroad grant is paid to certain counties in Oregon in lieu of taxes that would be collected by the counties if the lands were in private ownership; 25 per cent of the receipts from sale of land and timber in the Coos Bay wagon-road grant is paid to the counties within which the sales were made; the receipts from Indian lands, with the exception of 37½2 per cent of rentals and royalties from the Red River oil lands in Oklahoma, which is paid to the State, are deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the various Indian tribes.
All other moneys are deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the general fund.
The following table shows the disposition of these moneys in so far as it is possible to do so before final settlement of all accounts by the General Accounting Office.
The total expenditures for the conduct of the business of the General Land Office and its field activities amounted to $2,237,303.38.
Disbursements from deposits by individuals for surveying public lands ($25,560.52) and from appropriations and funds for surveying Indian reservations ($86,541) are not included in the above figures, either as receipts or expenditures.
Area of land entered and patented.
The total area of public and Indian lands embraced in original entries allowed during the year was 4,612,722 acres, as compared with 3,726,421 acres the previous year.
The area patented was 2,494,647 acres, as compared with 2,477,868 acres the previous year.
Of the above area 1,890,026 acres were patented under the homestead laws.
Field service.
The total amount of cash collected and turned into the Treasury as the result of the work of the feld service was $37,345.74.
Civil suits brought through the Department of Justice and criminal prosecutions instituted upon the recommendation of the public land service resulted in the recovery of $5,870, the restoration to the public domain of 6,237 acres, $2,180 in fines collected, 8 convictions, and 6 prison sentences.
Twenty-nine indictments were secured.
Due to the activity of the field investigators, 159,000 acres were restored to the public domain, representing attempts to secure through fraud title to Government land.
Forest fires.
The appropriation for protecting public land, timber, etc., under which the field investigating service is maintained, contained a legislative allotment of $40,000 for the prevention and suppression of forest 'and other fires on public lands.
A total of $40,644.96 was expended or obligated during the fire-hazard season, or $644.96 more than the allotment.
This excess was paid from the funds provided for the routine work of the service.
At the beginning of this fiscal year, or from July 1 to September 30, 1928, there were employed 47 forest patrols and lookouts.
At the opening of the fire-hazard season in 1929, or during the months of May and June, 1929, 58 patrols and lookouts were on duty, as follows: Alaska, 3; California, 14; Idaho, 16; Montana, 3; Oregon, 12; Washington, 10.
The fire hazard in the northwestern and Pacific Coast States is extreme.
While this department has done fairly well in its attempts to protect Government timber from the ravages of fire, it has not met its share of the expense when the sums expended by the individual States and private interests are considered.
The Government should not depend on the States to protect the public timber and brush lands.
It should heartily join with them in their efforts to protect and conserve the timber resources of the West and Northwest.
It is therefore urged that, without reducing the amounts for other protection purposes, the allotment for fire protection be increased $60,000, or to a total of $100,000, instead of $40,000, the present allotment.
Surveys.
The public land survey was extended during the fiscal year in 25 States and in the Territory of Alaska under 243 separate groups, 91 of which, in 20 States, were resurveys.
In addition, miscellaneous surveys, including work for and in cooperation with other Federal agencies, were executed in every part of the public domain.
The largest volume of surveys executed during the year in any one classification were those initiated upon applications for surveys to meet the requirements of entry under the enlarged and the stock raising homestead acts and by the States.
Activities in this field, aggregating over 3,000,000 acres in surveyed and resurveyed lands, were carried on in all Western States, the more extensive areas surveyed being in Arizona, California, Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, and Utah.
In' the mineral classification there were surveyed 200,000 acres of land deemed to be valuable for oil and 95,000 acres of potash lands in Utah and 46,000 acres of oilshale land in western Colorado.
In addition there were surveys of mineral lands in western Wyoming and in Nevada and New Mexico.
Cooperative surveys were executed for the Forest Service, National Parks Service, Federal Power Commission, the Department of Commerce, and for the Supreme Court of the United States.
Surveys on Indian lands were executed during the year under various appropriations therefor.
During the year that part of the resurvey work which may be measured on an area basis aggregated over 1,000,000 acres.
There were accepted and placed on file plats representing 2,593,034 acres of original surveys of public lands and in addition 788,653 acres of lands resurveyed, comprising an aggregate area of 3,381,687 acres.
Map making and drafting.
The copper-plate base of the United States map was revised for printing the 1929 edition.
State maps of Minnesota and the northern half of California were revised, printed, and issued.
A map of the southern half of California was compiled and is now in the hands of the contractor for printing.
The map of Nevada has been recompiled and the drafting thereof is now approaching completion.
Special maps were also prepared for the Department of Justice in connection with suits brought by Indians to recover the value of large areas of land within nine different States.
There were sold 20,490 photolithographic copies of township plats, for which $10,363.25 was received, and 7,638 copies were furnished other departments for official use.
Homestead and related entries.
There were approved for patent 8,236 homestead entries.
In those public-land States where the last remaining district land offices have been discontinued the work formerly performed by those offices has been transferred to this office, thereby materially increasing the duties of the office.
The business is transacted directly with the public.
Diagrams and plats showing status of lands are made and furnished, claimants are advised regarding status of particular tracts of lands, and necessary procedure to be followed for the proper initation and perfection of claims, also as to the method of initiating and prosecuting contest proceedings.
All necessary blank forms are provided.
Correspondence work has likewise been materially increased.
Land matters are handled from the very inception of an application to its conclusion.
Stock-raising homesteads.
Final stock-raising homestead entries numbering 3,271 for 1,350,384.64 acres were patented with a reservation of all minerals to the United States.
Since the passage of the stock-raising homestead act 55,079 patents thereunder have been issued, covering an aggregate of 20,232,398 acres.
Stock driveways.
The area withdrawn during the year for this purpose amounted to 92,287 acres and that released from such withdrawals to 17,765.
The total gross area included in stock-driveway withdrawals at the close of the fiscal year was 9,282,975 acres.
Mineral entries.
During the year 276 entries under the mining laws were approved for patent and 1,164 mineral entries were received for action.
Oil and gas applications.
Under sections 13 and 20 of the leasing act 3,222 applications for permits were received.
Permits were granted on 2,488 applications.
There were received for reconsideration 51,220 cases; 16,562 permits were held for cancellation and 8,906 permits were canceled, and 11,937 cases were examined on which further action was necessary.
Since the inauguration of the oilconservation policy on March 12, 1929, no new applications for prospecting permits have been received.
Applications pending at that time were finally rejected and closed, and all permits not in good standing were held for cancellation and upon failure to show cause were canceled.
Those cases in which equities were alleged by permittees and showings in support thereof filed are receiving careful consideration, and this work is being disposed of as rapidly as possible.
Under section 14 of the leasing act, which authorizes leases to permittees who show a discovery of oil or gas as a result of prospecting under a permit, 50 leases were issued covering an aggregate of 24,069 acres.
Under section 17, authorizing the public sale of leases, three leases were issued in the Monroe gas field, Louisiana, aggregating 359 acres, on which bonuses were paid amounting to $6,687.50.
During the year 619 applications for relief under sections 14, 18, 18a, 19, and 22 of the act were considered and 53 leases were granted.
Other mineral permits and leases.
During the year 83 coal prospecting permits were issued, covering 91,090 acres, and 39 coal leases, covering an aggregate of 6,511 acres, and 13 coal licenses, covering 426 acres, were issued.
Thirty-two potash permits were issued under the act of October 2, 1917, covering an aggregate of 63,905 acres, and under the act of February 25, 1920, eight sodium permits were issued.
Receipts under the mineral leasing act.
Receipts from bonuses royalties, and rentals under the law providing for the leasing of mineral rights on the public domain aggregated $3,884,878.68.
The largest receipts were obtained from leasing mineral lands in Wyoming, the amount being $2,835,871.32.
The second State in the amount of receipts was California, with $644,191.22.
Pursuant to the mineral leasing act, each State receives 371/2 per cent of the receipts from bonuses, rentals, and royalties derived from the public lands within its borders, the reclamation fund receives 521/2 per cent, and the other 10 per cent remains in the Treasury of the United States and is credited to miscellaneous receipts.
Restorations and openings subject to preference right of exservice men.
During the year the public lands in areas restored to entry and opened on survey with a preference right to veterans of the World War amounted to 237,891 acres and 1,547,144 acres, respectively.
Aviation leases.
Under specific authority of Congress, 320 acres were leased to the town of Parco, Wyo., for a period of 20 years as an aviation field.
Under the general law providing for aviation leases, 16 applications were filed and further action awaits compliance with the regulations by the applicants or reports from the Department of Commerce.
Fur farming.
Consideration was given to 160 applications for leases for fur farming in Alaska; 10 leases were granted, 2 were canceled, and the remainder of the applications await reports from the field.
Grazing leases in Alaska.
Seventy-nine applications for grazing leases were filed, but action in the majority of the cases awaits reports from the field.
State, county, or city recreational areas.
Twelve withdrawals were made for recreational classification aggregating 69,089 acres, based on 1 municipal, 4 county, and 7 State petitions.
Two tracts have been purchased under the law by the State of Oregon.
Four withdrawn areas have been released, having been found not chiefly valuable for recreational purposes.
National forests.
There are now 150 national forests embracing 184,564,953 acres, of which a little over 86 per cent is public land.
Changes made effected a gross addition of 1,121,258 acres to national forests and the exclusion•of 960,124 acres therefrom.
Railroad rights of way.
Two hundred and seven railroad rightof-way applications were received.
Forty-three were approved, 2 canceled, and requirements made in 123 cases.
Stock water reservoirs.
Eighty-five reservoir declaratory statement applications were received.
Requirements were made in 15 cases, and 66 were otherwise disposed of.
All other rights of way.
Five hundred and sixty-three irrigation and miscellaneous right-of-way applications were received, which, together with 65 brought over from the previous year, made a total of 628.
Under action taken 20 cases remained on hand at the close of the year.
Forfeitures.
The number of approved rights of way of all kinds which were awaiting office action July 1, 1928, was 51, which, together with 1,017 received, totaled 1,068.
Of these, proof of construction was accepted on 95, there were canceled by relinquishment or default 146, requirements were made in 721 cases, and 75 were otherwise disposed of.
Five forfeiture suits were recommended and 23 decrees of forfeiture obtained as a result of previous recommendations.
Thirty-one suits are pending in the Department of Justice.
Hydroelectric power.
Federal Water Power Commission, involving public lands and lands within national forests in 11 States and the Territory of Alaska.
United States reclamation projects.
Original homestead entries on reclamation projects pending at the beginning of the fiscal year were 138, and there were 427 received.
One hundred and seventythree were examined and accepted, 41 canceled, and claimants were called upon for additional evidence in 79 cases.
One hundred and eighty-seven reclamation homestead entries were approved for patent.
Reclamation withdrawals and restorations.
During the year there were promulgated 15 orders of withdrawal and 46 orders of restoration under the reclamation act.
The outstanding item was the withdrawal for the Colorado River storage, or the Boulder Dam project, of 2,746,360 acres in Arizona, 237,440 acres in California, and 105,680 acres in Nevada.
State irrigation districts.
Since the passage of the acts of August 11, 1916, and May 15, 1922, applications by 72 irrigation districts for approval have reached the office.
During the year 5 applications were approved, 2 rejected, and 1 is awaiting further evidence on behalf of the districts.
Since the date of the acts applications by 58 districts, embracing a gross area of 2,432,258 acres, have been approved; and applications by 14 districts, embracing a gross area of 274,688 acres, have been finally rejected.
Interlocutory action on all districts during the year involved a total of 402,914 acres.
Private irrigation projects.
During the past fiscal year 13 reports were received as the resuit of investigations of private irrigation enterprises and State irrigation districts upon which claimants and applicants under the desert-land law were depending for their water supply, making a total of 1,401 such projects reported on since the adoption of the regulations of September 30, 1910.
Desert lands.
The disposals are summarized as follows: Desertland entries approved, 529; canceled, 501; requirements made, 1,446; otherwise disposed of, 739; pending at close of the year, 212.
Carey Act.
Carey Act withdrawals, segregations, and patent applications aggregating 1,379,871 acres were considered and either interlocutory or final action was taken upon 1,373,296 acres thereof The total area now segregated and unpatented is 733,806 acres.
Pittman Act.
Three hundred and forty-nine Pittman Act applications and permits were before the office for action; 80 were approved, 89 canceled, requirements were made in 100 cases, and 17 were otherwise disposed of.
Swamp lands.
During the past year there were patented under the swamp land act 11,033 acres to the several States entitled thereto.
Withdrawals and restorations.
During the year 6,022,954 acres of public land were withdrawn or placed in a state of reservation by either Executive or departmental order, and 716,337 acres theretofore withdrawn or reserved were restored to entry or other proper disposition.
Contests.
Two thousand five hundred and eighty-nine contest records were received and decisions were rendered in 2,517 cases.
Indians and Indian lands.
Fee patents to the number of 1,208, involving 177,643 acres, and 887 trust patents for 95,804 acres were issued.
A very considerable amount of data was furnished to the Court of Claims in connection with suits brought by various Indian tribes.
State grants and State selections.
Title was conveyed to various States covering 169,927 acres involved in indemnity school selections and 2,914 acres of quantity selections.
Conveyances amounting to 6,690 acres were made to the States with a reservation of certain mineral deposits.
The act of January 25, 1927, granting mineralized school sections to the various States, greatly increased the work of adjudication of indemnity school-land selections, as it was necessary to determine whether title passed to the State under the original granting act as nonmineral land or under the act of 1927 as mineral land, and whether the State is entitled to indemnity on account of the mineral character of the land or for other reasons.
School sections.
Three hundred and seventy-four adjudications of school sections were made and it was held that title remained in the United States as to 13,251 acres, that 124,416 acres had passed to the States under the original grant, 40,608 acres under the act of January 25, 1927, and that 14,079 acres had passed to the States in cases where the General Land Office declined to specify the act under which title had passed.
Railroad grants and selections.
Railroad and wagon-road selections were received during the year to the amount of 161,493 acres, and during the same period there were certified and patented in satisfaction of such grants 230,418 acres, the total acreage adjudicated being 367,827 acres.
Railroad adjustments.
The work of adjusting nine railroad land grants was completed.
The act of June 25, 1929, directed the institution and prosecution of proceedings looking to the final adjustment of the Northern Pacific Railroad grant.
Oregon and California railroad lands.
Under the act of June 9, 1916, 101 sales of timber were held during the year involving 9,946 acres, containing 252,552,000 feet board measure of timber, for which $571,411.15 was received.
Town sites.
During the year 2,181 town-lot cases were examined and 374 patents were issued for lots.
Government title to Harding town site sustained.
In the suit brought by the United States to eject Lewis G. Norton from land occupied in the town site of Harding, Fla., which had been pending for several years, involving about $400.000, final judgment was returned in favor of the Government by the Federal District Court of Florida.
Abandoned military reservations.
One hundred and fifty-nine cases involving abandoned military reservations were considered and: 40 patents were issued.
Exchanges.
Ninety-two applications for exchanges under the act: of January 27, 1922, were considered and patents were issued in 34 instances.
Forest consolidations.
Under the acts of March 20, 1922, and February 28, 1925, authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to accept title to any privately owned lands within the exterior limits of national forests which, in the opinion of the Secretary of Agriculture, are chiefly valuable for national-forest purposes, and in exchange therefor to patent other lands in the same State, 726 cases were adjudicated, resulting in the issuance of patent in 65 cases and in adding 198,832 acres to the national forests.
Forest lieu selections.
Four hundred and sixty-one forest lieu selections were considered and 34 cases were approved for patenting, many of them being selections which had been awaiting final adjudication pending the survey of the selected land.
Riparian rights.
Forty-nine cases involving riparian rights were considered and patents were issued in 34 instances.
Scrip, warrants, etc.
One hundred and forty-three scrip cases were considered and 10 patents issued.
Nine hundred and thirtysix cases involving soldiers' additional homestead rights, commonly called soldiers' additional scrip, were considered and 59 patents were issued.
While there is not a large number of military bounty land warrants now outstanding, and these must be used in lieu of cash as payments on other entries or claims, there is much correspondence regarding matters of a historical nature in connection with these warrants.
Repayments.
Under the several acts governing repayments, there were stated during the fiscal year 210 accounts allowing repayment of $20,101.27, and during said period there were denied 158 claims for repayment.
Tract book notations.
The total number of notations for the year was 190,680.
This includes 76,939 appeals and other miscellaneous cases, 774 Indian allotments, 8,224 final and cash certificates, 4,459 oil and gas applications, 233 coal applications, 13,230 original entries, and 479 plats of survey.
District of Columbia.
Patent for approximately 4 acres of land in Randle Highlands in the District of Columbia was issued to Byron E. Hamlin under resolution of Congress approved February 16, 1839 (5 Stat. 365).
Remaining public domain.
Exclusive of Alaska and the public lands included in Indian reservations, national forests, and national parks, and withdrawn for water power, stock driveway, and other public purposes, or withdrawn as valuable for mineral or for prospective mineral value or classified as mineral, the area of the public domain subject to disposition under applicable land laws on June 30, 1929, was 190,031,722 acres, of which 137,194,449 acres are surveyed, the remainder being unsurveyed.
This summary covers a period antedating in its entirety the administration of the present commissioner and assistant commissioner, who took office July 1, 1929.
In presenting a résumé of the activities of the Indian Service during the fiscal year attention is again invited to the inadequacy of the yearly appropriations for accomplishment of its work and to the wisdom of increased appropriations as an economic measure.
For teaching positions in the Indian school service the required civil service qualifications have been raised and for positions of principal a degree has been made a prerequisite for examination and appointment.
Indians have been given a classified civil-service status effective April 1, 1929, but after that date those entering the service, except in certain minor positions, are required to qualify in open competitive examination, certain preferences being allowed, however, in compliance with existing law requiring that Indians shall be employed whenever practicable.
In the health work closer cooperation has been developed with State, county, and municipal health organizations, whereby diagnostic, laboratory, and clinical facilities of these various organizations are being made known and available to health agencies of the Indian Service.
Through the activities of the service some decrease in the incidence of trachoma has been indicated and facilities for treatment of this disease have been increased.
Several new hospitals and sanatoria were established during the year.
Preparations were made to operate the Tacoma Hospital, Washington, with a capacity of about 100 beds for treatment of tuberculosis.
Other hospitals were established at the Western Navajo jurisdiction, Chin Lee and Havasupai, all in Arizona; at Taos and Tohatchi, N. Mex., and at Keshena, Wis.
A converted building has been made into an improvised sanatorium at Crow Creek, S. Dak., and a new sanatorium has been built within the Yakima Reservation at Toppenish, Wash.
These hospital and sanatorium facilities have added approximately 312 beds for Indians in need of treatment.
In continuance of the effort to further the enrollment of Indian children in the State public schools, now having an attendance of about 35,000, a movement has been inaugurated to study the enrollment in the Government boarding schools in order to eliminate therefrom those who may to advantage attend the public schools and thus make room for many other Indian children who are without educational opportunities.
Age-grade comparisons are given for the fiscal years 1926 to 1929, inclusive, and these show a consistent increase in the number of Indian children in the higher grades, especially from the seventh to the twelfth, inclusive.
For many years existing law has limited the expenditure for support of Indian boarding schools to certain fixed but inadequate amounts per pupil.
For many years the limit so prescribed was $167 per capita, but was later raised somewhat, the highest allowance being $285 for schools having an attendance of less than 200 students.
This legislation has been repealed by act of March 2, 1929.
Generally throughout the country the Indians have continued to make encouraging progress along industrial lines, especially in farming and livestock activities, and preliminary reports indicated that there was a substantial increase in the number of Indians farming and in the cultivated acreage on nearly all of the reservations.
Cooperation in this work has been given by the extension service of the United States Department of Agriculture and by many State colleges which have placed their facilities at the disposal of the Indian Service.
There were appointed during the year six directors of agriculture and three home demonstration agents, and this personnel should do much in furtherance of the agricultural pursuits.
It has been reported that there are many first-class farmers among the Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes, and that commendable progress has been made in the education and competency of the restricted Indians.
It is said that in many instances the Indian farmers have benefited by the demonstration and results of superior methods employed by white farmers in their neighborhood and desire better homes and more modern farming equipment.
The Coolidge Dam for conservation of the waters of the Gila River in Arizona has been completed.
This will serve to irrigate approximately 100,000 acres, of which 50,000 are allotted lands within the Pima Reservation, where opportunity will be thus afforded to these Indians for their agricultural development.
The act of May 18, 1928 (45 Stat. L. 602), authorized the attorney general of the State of California to bring suit in the United States Court of Claims on behalf of the Indians of the State and directs the Secretary of the Interior to make a roll of those Indians who shall be found entitled to share in any favorable judgment.
There are 205 Indian irrigation projects, of which 80 were active during the year.
The cost of these to June 30, 1929, has approximated, for construction, $37,104,000, and for operation and maintenance, $10,284,000.
The total area of land under constructed irrigation works is 754,000 acres, the total acreage irrigated during 1928 being 387,552 acres.
Indians was 124,316, the area irrigated by lessees r03,578, and by white owners of land 159,658 acres.
In April, 1929, the Board of Indian Commissioners passed its sixtieth year of active cooperation, as one of the independent Government establishments, with the President, Congress, the Department of the Interior, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, in matters concerning the Indians who are under Federal administration.
Its value lies in its independence of viewpoint.
During these six decades the board not only has transmitted reports on its field investigation and problem surveys to the Secretary but also has submitted to him an annual report.
Its sixtieth annual report shows that during the fiscal year 1929, the board officially visited and inspected 23 Indian Service agencies and nonreservation schools in California, Florida, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Washington, and Wisconsin.
This account of the board's doings in 1929 also, contains a retrospect, in outline, of the past six decades of Federal administration of Indian affairs, which was undertaken with the purpose of identifying some of the underlying causes of the present Indian situation.
In addition to its regular annual and semiannual meetings, the board held a special session in April, 1929, to confer with the secretary on some of the broader aspects of administration and received from him a program which outlined his policy for advancing the welfare of the Indians.
In its sixtieth annual report the board declares that the Secretary's announced policy should meet the general approval of fair-minded forward-looking friends of the Indian people.
Its objective is plainly disclosed in the opening paragraph of the statement, “to make the Indian a self-sustaining, self-respecting American citizen just as rapidly as this can be brought about.
In summarizing its report the board stresses the prevalence of tuberculosis and trachoma among the Indians and declares that the health situation demands a special program for the Indian medical service, centering on a vigorous and sustained campaign against tuberculosis and trachoma, aided and abetted by largely augmented appropriations from Congress, sufficient to adequately finance the intensified medical service activities which necessarily would be brought into action and which should be carried on by tuberculosis and trachoma specialists.
Each reservation should have its particular program determined by qualifled specialists sent there for that particular purpose and, where there are none, competent agricultural instructors should be detailed to reservations to lead the Indians toward a better appreciation of subsistence farming.
Any reservation economic program will fall short of its full purpose if it does not include provisions for ways and means to secure gainful labor for the Indians, especially at times when crop failure, or other causes, makes it necessary for the Indians to leave their homes to find work.
The Indian Service never has had a well-planned organization to get jobs for Indians.
An Indian school which tends more and more to stress the academic at the expense of the practical, to lay emphasis on the completion of high-school courses and the attainment of college entrance credits, is losing sight of its real reason for existence, which is to prepare the Indian boys and girls eventually to take their places as self-reliant members of an American community.
Indian Service schools should strive not so much for uniformity and standardization as for adaption to actual and varying needs; they should apply methods suited to the special problem of the Indian.
Above all they should emphasize vocational training and the teaching of applicable and useful trades.
The Indian Service should draft a bill which would properly and adequately provide for the enforcement of law and order on reservations, have the bill introduced at the coming session of Congress, and then do all things that are proper to get the bill enacted into law.
The simple answer to the question, How shall the fleld service be bettered in all respects?
The failure of the purpose of the allotment act must be admitted.
Indian Bureau should be characterized by caution and guided only by consideration for the best interest of the allottees.
The great American public is lamentably ignorant about the American Indians.
The Interior Department or the Bureau of Indian Affairs would be doing only a plain duty by disseminating sane and reliable information about the American tribes and their people, about their peculiar relations to the Nation, and about the various phases of the perplexing and complicated Indian problem.
It is to be hoped that the devoted labors of reservation missionaries may yet be appreciated by church members and that the churches will encourage their home mission boards to continue and enlarge their mission activities in the American Indian country.
Number of pensioners.
There were on the roll at the end of the fiscal year 477,915 pensioners, as against 491,194 at the beginning of the year, a net loss to the roll of 13,279.
The number of Civil War soldiers dropped from 74,929 to 59,945, a decrease of 14,984.
Of the Civil War widows, the number dropped from 197,934 to 181,235, a decrease of 16,699.
During the year 43,594 pensioners died, of which number 15,089 were Civil War soldiers, 22,429 were Civil War widows, and 3,993 were Spanish War soldiers.
These losses were largely offset by the addition to the roll of 31,392 pensioners, of whom 17,945 were Spanish War soldiers and 3,489 Spanish War widows.
The highest number of Civil War soldiers on the roll was in 1898, when there were 745,822.
The highest number of Civil War widows on the roll was in 1912, when there were 304,373.
The number of Spanish War soldiers on the roll June 30, 1929, was 178,804 as against 164,708 on June 30, 1928, an increase of 14,096.
The number of widows, minor children, and dependents of Spanish War soldiers on the roll June 30, 1929, was 28,643, as against 26,195 on June 30, 1928, an increase of 2,448.
At the close of this fiscal year there were still 11 widows of soldiers of the War of 1812 on the pension roll.
Of the war with Mexico 1 soldier and 730 widows were in receipt of pension.
The sole survivor of the Mexican War, Owen Thomas Edgar, died September 3, 1929, at the age of 98 years 2 months and 17 days.)
On account of service in various Indian wars, 5,574 soldiers and 4,000 widows were in receipt of pension June 30, 1929.
For service connected disabilities, 14,758 soldiers were on the roll and 3,699 widows, the death of whose husbands was due to causes originating in service in line of duty.
By classes the pension roll showed at the close of this fiscal year 259,127 soldiers, 210,724 widows, 2,304 minor children, 884 helpless children, 4,423 dependent parents, and 453 Army nurses.
Disbursements.
In the fiscal year 1929 the amount disbursed for pensions was $229,889,986.48.
This amount represented the entire appropriations for 1929 plus $603,384.18 drawn from the appropriation of $221,000,000 for 1930.
For fees and expenses of examining surgeons, $451,680.18 were disbursed; for cost, maintenance, and expenses of pension system, $1,276,511.65; and for per diem and expenses of field representatives, $125,989.75.
There was expended out of the “civil-service retirement and disability fund" the amount of $12,005,048.88 for annuities and $4,067,423.54 for refunds.
The /appropriation for administration of the retirement law was $82,900 and expenditures were $82,557.45, of which $70,421.29 were for personal services.
The total disbursements made by the Pension Bureau in 1929 were $246,414,139.08, which required the issuance of 6,154,943 checks.
Applications fled and certificates issued.
On June 30, 1928, there were on file 42,589 active claims.
During the year 135,708 claims were received, making a total of 178,297 before the bureau for consideration.
The disposals numbered 137,015, leaving 41,282 claims on hand June 30, 1929.
Of the claims disposed of 25,004 were based on Civil War service and 79,046 on Spanish War service.
During the year 84,374 pension certificates were issued, 1,074 reissues in lieu of lost certificates, 7,148 accrued pension orders, and 2,827 orders issued authorizing reimbursements for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners amounting to $112,627.82.
The number of pension claims allowed since the establishment of the pension system has been as follows: Original claims of soldiers and sailors, 1,517,871; reissue and increase claims, 4,157,792; claims of widows, minor children, and dependents, 1,241,207; total of all claims, 6,916,870.
The total amount paid to pensioners from 1790 to end of fiscal year 1929 has been $7,950,354,932.29.
Medical examinations.
Interior for 1930, claimants for pension or increase of pension are now being examined by one surgeon only, who is paid a fee of $5 for each examination, instead of by three surgeons, as under the former board method of making examinations, each of whom received $3 for his participation in the examination.
Under this new method there is a substantial saving in the cost of medical examinations.
Based on an annual average of 60,000 examinations it is estimated that a saving of at least $150,000 per year will be effected.
Double pension—Aviation accident.
Between March 3, 1915, and March 1, 1929, double pension for disability or death due to aviation accident was payable only in Navy or Marine Corps cases.
On the latter date the Congress amended the act of March 3, 1915, so as to make it applicable to officers and enlisted men of the Army.
As the law now reads, any enlisted man of the Army, Navy, or Marine Corps disabled by reason of any injury received or disease contracted in line of duty the result of an aviation accident received while employed in actual flying or in handling aircraft is entitled to double pension, and should death of an officer or enlisted man occur by reason of an injury so received or disease so contracted, double pension is paid to the person otherwise entitled to pension by reason of such death.
Administration of retirement act.
During the past fiscal year the work of adjudication of claims under the civil service retirement act was practically current.
Of the 32,321 claims of all classes before the bureau for action, 30,640 were disposed of, leaving 1,681 active claims awaiting responses to calls for information necessary to their final settlement.
The balance in the civil-service retirement and disability fund on June 30, 1928, was $83,078,000.43.
During the fiscal year there was added to the fund as deductions from salaries of classified civilservice employees, $28,019,824.61, and as interest and profits, $4,550,- 042.24, making a total of $115,647,867.28.
To this amount must be added $19,950,000 appropriated from the general fund of the Treasury.
The disbursements for the year on account of annuities were $12,005,048.88 and on account of refunds, $4,067,423.54, a total of $16,072,472.42.
The balance in the fund June 30, 1929, was $119,525,394.86.
The Office of Education has no administrative functions except those connected with the xpenditure of the funds appropriated by the Federal Government for the maintenance of colleges of agriculture and the mechanic arts in the several States and Territories, and those connected with the education, support, and medical relief of natives of Alaska.
It is primarily an establishment for educational research and promotion.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1929, the office completed its survey of negro colleges and universities throughout the United States.
The results of this comprehensive study showed great advancement and an extraordinary demand among the negro people of the country for college and university education.
The progress of the survey of land-grant colleges begun in July, 1927, was gratifying.
Leading authorities in land-grant college education are now engaged in writing the tentative reports on the several aspects of the survey.
A school building survey was made of the Mount Vernon schools, Mount Vernon, N. Y., at the request of the board of education.
A survey was also made of the junior and senior high schools of Roanoke, Va.
Upon the invitation of the board of education of Huntington, W. Va., a survey was made of the school finances in that city.
Conferences.
Two important conferences in the field of education were called by the Secretary of the Interior during the latter part of the fiscal year.
The first was devoted to the subject of education by radio, and the second to the relationship which should exist between the Federal Government and education in the States.
The conference on education by radio, which was held on May 24, 1929, in the office of the Secretary of the Interior, was attended by educators and representatives of various radio corporations.
A conference called by the Secretary of the Interior, February 10, 1929, and participated in by Members of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees, officers of Howard University, and members of the staff of the Office of Education was held for the purpose of discussing future relationships of the Federal Government to Howard University.
Since the foregoing a series of conferences have been held in the Office of Education to prepare a plan for a 20-year program of development for Howard University.
Conference of State and county supervisors of rural education of the Southern States held at New Orleans, La., December, 1928.
Conference of State and county supervisors of rural schools of the Midwestern States held at Des Moines, Iowa, June, 1929.
Library.
During nine months of the year the library division was without a librarian.
An assistant educationist, who had been appointed temporarily to assist in the collecting and editing of material for the Bibliography of Research Studies in Education, left the service in June, 1928.
With this decrease in staff the task of maintaining the regular work of the division and carrying on the new research undertaking has been arduous.
Two important bulletins were completed and issued during the year, namely, Bulletin, 1928, No. 22, Bibliography of Research Studies in Education, 1926–27, with 162 pages; and Bulletin, 1928, No. 23, Record of Current Educational Publications, 1927, with 116 pages.
Publications.
The whole number of documents printed in the year ended June 30, 1929, was 75, of which 47 were bulletins, 7 leaflets and circulars, 1 report of the Commissioner of Education, 10 numbers of School Life, 8 numbers of the Clip Sheet, and 2 miscellaneous publications.
Of the bulletins issued, 13 were chapters for the Biennial Survey of Education.
The Clip Sheet, which was issued monthly for several years and was devoted to current news items regarding education, was discontinued during the year.
The allotment of funds for printing was $2,500 more than in 1928, and the total output of printed matter was greater by seven documents than in the previous year.
Twenty-eight manuscripts were in the files of the editorial division awaiting publication at the end of the year owing to the lack of funds available for printing.
Alaska.
Through its Alaska division, the Office of Education maintains schools, furnishes medical relief, supervises the reindeer industry, and provides assistance generally for the aboriginal races in the widely varying regions of Alaska.
The 27,000 Eskimos, Aleuts, Athabascans, and Thlingets are scattered along thousands of miles of coast from the southernmost boundary to the northernmost cape, and on the great rivers, in villages varying from 30 or 40 to 300 or 400 persons.
To some of the settlements on the shores of the frozen ocean or on remote islands the annual visit of the office's vessel, the Boxer, furnishes their only means of communication with the rest of the world.
In many instances the school is the only elevating influence in the village.
The growth of the reindeer industry rendered it urgent that provisions be made for the allotment of grazing lands.
By the act of March 4, 1927, authority was granted for the establishment by the Secretary of the Interior of grazing districts in Alaska, and for the granting of leases for definitely described areas therein.
The provisions of this act are being carried into effect as rapidly as possible by the General Land Office, with the cooperation of the Office of Education's supervisor of the reindeer service.
This action will regulate the occupancy of grazing lands by the reindeer herds and prevent friction among the owners of reindeer in regions where the herds are most numerous.
With the great increase in the number of reindeer and the entrance of white men into the industry, the need for scientific attention became apparent, resulting in the assignment by Congress to the Bureau of Biological Survey of the duty of making investigations in connection with the diseases and parasites affecting the reindeer; breeding, feeding, and management practices, and the grazing resources of the Territory.
In view of the fact that large numbers of reindeer are killed for food locally and for exportation, it is difficult to state the precise number in Alaska at any given date.
According to a statement submitte by the general supervisor of the Alaska reindeer service, the total number in Alaska June 30, 1929, was 599,825.
Based on a preliminary survey of the grazing areas of Alaska suitable for reindeer production in 1921, it was estimated that between 3,000,000 and 4,000,000 reindeer could be supported on the 150,000 to 200,000 square miles of open grazing lands, from which 1,000,000 or more animals would be available annually for slaughter.
Later investigations have shown that approximately 350,000 square miles of the Territory are of value for grazing.
The total number of pupils enrolled in the native schools of Alaska during the year was 3,660; the average daily attedance throughout the year was 2,588.31; total number of schools open, 93.
During the fiscal year the sum of $17,500 was spent for repairs on the school buildings and not counted as a part of the operation of the school.
The sum of $45,075.96 was spent for new buildings.
The radio service operated in Alaska by the War and Navy Departments has materially aided the office's work.
Emergency calls by radio for the services of a physician or nurse, requests for medicines or for advice as to treatment, have time and again resulted in the relief of illness or the saving of life.
Important administrative messages are promptly forwarded by radio to their destinations.
The use of the radio has mitigated the life of the teachers in many of the isolated villages, bringing them into instantaneous touch with the rest of the world.
The act of Congress entitled “An act to regulate the practice of the healing art to protect the public health in the District of Columbia," approved February 27, 1929, created a commission on licensure to practice the healing art in the District of Columbia and designated the Commissioner of Education as a member of the commission.
An act of Congress approved March 2, 1929, with respect to the licensing of degree-granting institutions in the District of Columbia charges the Board of Education of the District of Columbia with the duty of licensing such institutions but makes it the duty of all public officers and bureaus of the Federal Government concerned with educational matters to render such advice and assistance to the board of education as may be considered necessary or desirable.
Such assistance has been requested of this office by the board of education and assistance in the performance of its duties has been rendered.
With the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, plans are in process of formulation for the inauguration of correspondence courses of study for the benefit of the children living on Army, Navy, lighthouse, or other Federal reservations where schooling facilities are not available.
If desired by school officials of States, it is intended that such courses will be made available for the instruction of children in isolated communities, especially in communities where the small number of children makes it inadvisable to establish regular schools.
Toward the close of the year a member of the office's staff visited Toronto and Winnipeg, Canada, with a view to securing information regarding the conduct of correspondence courses as carried on in Canada.
It is hoped that this work may be inaugurated during the fall of 1929.
First.
Plans for a nation-wide survey of secondary education for which Congress has authorized the expenditure of $50,000 during the current fiscal year, and $100,000 and $75,000 in the two succeeding years, respectively.
Second.
A reorganization of the personnel of the Office of Education with a view to carrying out in the most effective way the purposes for which the Office of Education in the Department of the Interior was created, and to answer in some small measure new demands which appear to be proper functions for the office to perform.
Third.
The effectiveness of the work in Alaska and the reorganization of a type that will meet the present needs and in so far as possible relieve the Commissioner of Education of administrative responsibilities.
Only in the education of the natives of Alaska does the Commissioner of Education exercise any administrative authority over American schools, and here, curiously enough, are included responsibilities not usually assigned to school administrators, namely, hospitalization, oversight of certain trading and other financial operations, and the supervision of the reindeer industry.
A. That the seat of authority to administer should be located as near as possible to situations demanding attention.
This would seem to demand the transfer of the chief of the Alaska division from Seattle to Juneau, or possibly Anchorage.
This transfer is respectfully recommended even if no other changes at this time are contemplated.
B. That the officer charged with.administration of Alaskan affairs be given large discretionary powers.
In the past many matters which could have been settled on the ground in the light of broad policies laid down in Washington have been referred to the Commissioner of Education or an assistant secretary of the department for action, causing serious, delays.
C. That financial obligations properly incurred be settled promptly.
If this is to be the policy of this department, a disbursing officer representing the department in Alaska is required.
D. That as rapidly as possible the office of Commissioner of Education be relieved of such responsibilities for the Alaskan service as are primarily administrative in character.
1. Transfer of the oversight of the reindeer industry to other representatives of the Department of the Interior.
2. Transfer of the oversight of certain financial transactions to another representative of the Department of the Interior, perhaps to the commissioner who represents the Secretary in Alaska.
This would include the so-called Alaska trust fund, which probably should not be terminated for a few years, since there are still parts of Alaska not cared for by traders and other parts where the natives should not be left to the mercy of persons who possess a monopoly in this field.
This work has been admirably administered by A. H. Miller, who has rendered faithful and unselfish service to natives for many years.
This recommendation would also cover the services rendered by the Alaska division to the village of Metlakatla on Annette Island and general supervision of cooperative stores.
Whoever exercises oversight of this financial work in Alaska will doubtless find that it is still desirable to utilize the services of the teachers in the native schools to assist in keeping records of accounts of the native cooperative stores.
3. A transfer of the hospitals and their staffs to another representative of the department and the development of a policy which will tend to coordinate the health work for the natives with the health work for the whites under the health service of the Territorial Government.
If this service should remain in the Office of Education, the chief of the Alaska division insists that there be a general supervisor for the medical activities.
Alaska is a land of such sparse population and vast area that it seems unwise to develop two overhead organizations, one Federal and one Territorial.
Geologic work was done in 42 States and Alaska, and 13 of the States cooperated in this work.
The search for potash·was continued in the Permian salt basin of southeastern New Mexico and western Texas.
Samples for potash testing were obtained from nearly all wells being drilled in this area.
Four Government tests in Texas were completed during the year, and four sites in New Mexico were recommended for test during the fiscal year 1930.
Beds containing potash salts were found in all the Government tests, and since the end of the year one of the beds has been determined to be of prospective commercial value.
Study of the mining geology of Colorado was continued in cooperation with the State and the Colorado metal-mining fund.
Study of the mining districts in te greater Helena mining region, Montana, was continued in cooperation with the city of Helena.
Contributions were made to geologic maps of Arkansas, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Virginia for publication by the respective States.
A geologic map of the Grand Canyon was prepared and transmitted to the National Park Service for use in the museum at Yavapai Point.
A preliminary study of physiographic features of the Mississippi Valley from Wisconsin to the Gulf and of the lower valleys of the principal tributaries was made for the purpose of planning a systematic investigation of the regimen, deposits, and geologic history of these rivers.
A tract of 1,000 square miles near Mount Spurr, in the Alaska Range, was covered by geologic and topographic surveys.
The technical men reached this area by airplane from Anchorage in 80 minutes; the pack train carrying their supplies was more than 20 days on the route.
Airplane transportation is especially advantageous in Alaska on account of the shortness of the working season.
Topographic studies were made in connection with the Navy Department's airplane photographing expedition in the northern part of southeastern Alaska.
Reconnaissance topographic mapping in the Ketchikan district of southeastern Alaska utilized the drainage maps compiled from the aerial photographs taken by the Navy Department in 1926.
An arrangement was made whereby the Geological Survey will supply to the Alaska Railroad the services of an engineer or geologist for a part of the year to assist in solving geologic problems that may arise in the railroad work.
The topographic surveys made during the year covered more than 17,000 square miles and increased the proportion of the total area of the continental United States, exclusive of Alaska, mapped from 43.2 to 43.6 per cent.
In this work 25 States cooperated.
Measurements of stream flow were made in 47 States and Hawaii, and the number of gaging stations was increased from 1,830 to 2,238.
In this work cooperation was furnished by 35 States and Hawaii, also by other Government units.
A comprehensive study of well-drilling methods has been begun and assistance has been rendered to several State associations of well drillers.
Numerous samples of water from the Colorado and other rivers were examined to determine their content of dissolved and suspended mineral matter.
The work of classifying public and Indian lands with respect to mineral content and of supervising mineral operations on such lands was carried on in 21 States and Alaska.
The results accomplished include a net decrease of 55,549 acres in area classified as mineral in character and an increase of 1,688,316 acres in outstanding mineral withdrawals.
There were net increases of 245,808 acres in power reserves, of 142,493 acres in enlarged-homestead designations, of 1,141,957 acres in stock-raising homestead designations, and of 15,040 acres in public water reserves.
The royalties, rentals, and bonuses accrued from all mineral operations on public lands amounted to $4,100,069, more than 89 per cent of it from oil and gas operations.
Inspectional, regulatory, and advisory service was rendered in connection with the leasing of mineral deposits on Indian lands in seven States, on which the royalty value amounted to $7,500,000.
Supervision over oil and gas operations on naval petroleum reserves was continued, and the royalty value resulting from these operations was $1,817,464.
The outstanding publications of the year comprised an elaborate report on the copper deposits of Michigan, a series of studies of Basin Range structure, a report on the Mother Lode system of California, a manual of instructions for the topographic work, a geologic map of New Mexico, several of the series of large-scale maps of Los Angeles County, Calif., and of Chicago and vicinity, and three of the series ofland-classification maps of the central'Great Plains with descriptive text.
The area cropped was 2,681,270 acres, an increase of 177,224 acres The total value of crops was $143,573,070, an increase of $10,365,- 860 compared with 1927.
Since water was first available for irrigation in 1906, the cumulative value of crops grown on land furnished with water from Government works amounted to $1,481,087,800.
The construction payments were $4,387,813.80, an increase of $932,- 049.11 compared with the previous year.
The payments received for operation and maintenance were $1,920, 500.57, or $77,115.71 greater than in the previous year.
The total payments in the fiscal year 1929 amounted to $6,308,314.37, compared with $5,299,149.55 in 1928, an increase of $1,009,164.82.
The income to the Bureau of Reclamation during the fiscal year was $9,851,438.62, or $548,108.37 greater.
The operation expense for the year was $1,786,928.81, an increase compared with the previous year of $23,976.14.
Excess of operation and maintenance receipts over expense for the period amounted to $133,571.76, compared with an excess of $80,432.19 for the previous year.
The amount appropriated for construction was $12,286,500, compared with $9,869,000 the previous year, both figures exclusive of reappropriations.
The amount expended on construction was $7,898,304.69, compared with $6,966,449.25 the previous year.
Stony Gorge Dam, on the Orland project, California, was completed in October, 1928.
Gibson Dam, on the Sun River project, Montana, was practically completed at the end of the fiscal year.
Echo Dam, on the Salt Lake Basin project, Utah, was about 40 per cent completed, and the 405-foot Owyhee Dam, on the Owyhee project, Oregon-Idaho, about 14 per cent.
Work continued on the construction of the Easton diversion dam and the canal system on the Kittitas division of the Yakima project, Washington, and on the main canal and Harper diversion dam, on the Vale project, Oregon.
The total length of canals, ditches, and drains constructed to the end of the fiscal year amounted to 16,557 miles.
Tunnels numbered 122, and totaled 175,536 feet in length.
Concrete and wood canal structures numbered 148,462; bridges, 11,631, with a total length of 277,449 feet; and culverts, 14,043, with a total length of 535,396 feet.
The amount of concrete, metal, tile, and wood pipe laid to the end of the fiscal year amounted to 4,091,096 linear feet, and there had been constructed 4,811 concrete, metal, and wood flumes totaling 853,022 feet in length.
Telephone lines amounted to 3,350 miles, and transmission lines, 2,056 miles.
The 35 power plants developed 166,128 horsepower.
Excavation during the fiscal year amounted to 9,996,- 368 cubic yards of earth, indurated material, and rock, bringing the total to the end of the year to 276,822,500 cubic yards.
Riprap totaled 2,533,787 cubic yards; paving, 1,080,328 square yards; and concrete placed, 4,191,553 cubic yards.
One of the outstanding events in the history of the Bureau of Reclamation was the approval by President Coolidge on December 21, 1928, of the Boulder Canyon project act, providing for the construction of Boulder Dam and the development of the Colorado River Basin.
The act became effective on June 25, 1929, through proclamation by President Hoover.
The bureau has been actively engaged in preparing for the work of construction, funds for which are contingent upon the entering into of contracts for the sale of power sufficient to return the cost of the work within 50 years, with interest at the rate of 4 per cent.
Conferences were held with representatives of various States, municipalities, and power companies interested in such contracts, and it was early evident that applications would be received for more power than could be developed at the dam.
Numerous conferences were held with officials of the Union Pacific system to evolve the most feasible scheme for rail facilities to the dam site.
A site for the construction camp has been selected, and plans are being perfected for the health and comfort of the workmen during the period of construction.
A contract was entered into with the Imperial irrigation district and the Coachella Valley County water district, which provides for a maximum expenditure of $100,000, payable equally by the United States and the two districts, under which the bureau has placed a force of men in the field to make the necessary surveys and investigations to determine definitely the location and estimated cost of the proposed all-American canal.
When completed this canal would do away with the present canal serving the Imperial Valley of California and running for 60 miles through Mexican territory.
There were on the projects in 1928, 40,788 irrigated farms, with a population of 153,663.
The project towns numbered 212, with an additional population of 451,811.
Included in the towns and in the irrigated area were 687 schools, 689 churches, and 136 banks with deposits of $147,732,900, the main portion of which came from the residents in the towns and surrounding irrigated farms.
During the year 28 public land farm units were opened to entry on the Tule Lake division of the Klamath project, Oregon-California, all of them being taken up almost immediately by qualified applicants.
In July, 1928, and in June, 1929, part 2 and part 8 of the Willwood division of the Shoshone project, comprising 25 and 29 farm units, respectively, were opened to entry, and at the end of the year these units were being steadily entered by farmers selected on the basis of approved qualifications of industry, experience, character, and capital.
Through the cooperation of the Lower Yellowstone Development Association a number of families were brought to the project, and several farms on which the Go'ernment held options were sold.
Lack of farm buildings on a namber of the farms has deterred active settlement on this, as well as on the Belle Fourche and Orland projects, where the Government holds similar options.
During the summer the Secretary of the Interior approved an economic survey of reclamation on a few projects where settlement and development have been unduly prolonged.
These included projects built by the Government, new projects now under construction, private projects taken over by the Government or requesting that such action be taken, and projects merely receiving water from Government works under Warren Act or other waterservice contracts.
The reports of the investigations will be correlated by a special committee which will prepare a final report and recommendations to the Secretary with a view to making constructive suggestions as to what can and should be done to improve conditions on these projects, and to aid Congress in enacting desirable legislation.
Little was done by the bureau in connection with the investigations of planned group settlement in the South other than a preliminary survey of a tract of land in North Carolina and of five tracts in Florida.
During the fall of 1928 a study of economic and social conditions in the South was made by Dr. E. C. Branson, of the University of North Carolina, and his report was published by the bureau under the title“Planned Colonies of Farm Owners.
The investigations made by the Bureau of Reclamation in the South have shown conclusively that this section of the country has all the material conditions for an attractive and prosperous rural life.
It has fine transportation facilities and is near the largest cities of the country.
The climate and soil make it possible for this region to be self-supporting in an agricultural sense and to supply some of the most needed and most valuable products of the country.
It needs, however, a well-rounded agricultural program.
There are many sections which should be hopeful and prosperous which now have a declining rural life.
This is wholly due to economic and human conditions which can and should be improved.
On January 8, 1929, Stephen T. Mather, Director of the National Park Service since it was established in May, 1917, and previously, from January 21, 1915, assistant to the Secretary of the Interior in charge of national parks, resigned on account of impaired health.
He was succeeded on January 12, 1929, by Horace M. Albright, assistant director (field) and superintendent of Yellowstone National Park.
The largest travel yet recorded to the national parks and monuments occurred in the year just ended.
A total of 2,680,597 persons visited the national parks and 567,667 the national monuments.
This total of 3,248,264 is an increase of 223,420 persons, or 7 per cent, over the previous high record of 1928.
The establishment of the Grand Teton National Park by act of Congress approved February 26, 1929, added the twenty-first national park to the system.
The Arches National Monument, established by presidential proclamation last April, is the thirty-third monument to be placed under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service.
Additions were also made to existing national parks through congressional action in making boundary adjustments.
Yellowstone National Park was enlarged by the addition of 78 square miles through boundary revisions on the north and east, and in the northwest corner.
Lassen Volcanic National Park was enlarged by the addition of 39 square miles of interesting volcanic area.
The Lafayette National Park, in Maine, was enlarged to 16 square miles and its name changed to Acadia.
Authority was also given the President to enlarge Yosemite National Park, and under this authority about 7,000 acres will be added to that park.
The area of the national-park system now totals 12,118 square miles, while that of the monument system administered by the National Park Service is 3,728 square miles.
The most important boundary survey undertaken during 1928–29 was that made by the Yellowstone Boundary Commission appointed by President Hoover.
The addition of the Upper Yellowstone region, long proposed by park authorities for extension to the southeast, would give a natural boundary to this section, while at the same time adding rugged wilderness country of exceptional beauty.
The Upper Yellowstone country, with the adjoining portion of the present park, constitutes one of the largest wilderness areas remaining in America, and should all be within the national park.
The commission is engaged in gathering further data on the boundary question and in preparing its report for submission to the President.
Studies of boundary adjustments for both Zion and Bryce Canyon National Parks, in southwestern Utah, are also under consideration.
The areas proposed for inclusion contain scenery of the first order.
Interesting progress is being made on the project to establish the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in the States of Tennessee and North Carolina.
Already one-half of the minimum area of 427,000 acres specified by Congress has been either purchased or optioned for purchase, and it is hoped that within two years, and possibly less, this minimum area will have been acquired and the park actually established.
The proposed boundary line of the Shenandoah National Park project, at the request of the State of Virginia, was studied and laid out on the ground.
Unfortunately, little more than half the funds estimated as necessary to purchase the lands for this proposed park have as yet been pledged.
The Mammoth Cave National Park Association has made considerable progress toward acquiring land for the proposed Mammoth Cave National Park.
For this project there has been reported subscribed so far, in money and property, $1,100,000, and important purchases have been consummated.
The Ouachita National Park project is still pending through a bill introduced in the first session of the Seventy-first Congress.
The area proposed for inclusion in this park project was examined on the ground jointly by representatives of the National Park and Forest Services, and later was investigated again by a special representative of the Park Service.
Both these investigations proved conclusively that the area contains no distinctive scenic or other features that would meet national-park requirements, and, based on these findings, an adverse report on the project was submitted to Congress by the Secretary of the Interior.
Despite this report, the bill passed both Houses of Congress and went to President Coolidge for consideration.
It was among the measures which failed to receive presidential approval before the close of the last administration.
Impetus was given to the development of educational facilities within the national parks during the past year by the studies and report of the informal committee appointed to make a thorough investigation of the educational possibilities in these areas.
Studies were made in all the major national parks and a number of the national monuments during the summer.
Members hope that the final report of the committee, which is functioning on a twc-year basis, may be submitted during the coming winter.
As a direct result of the activities of this committee, and in line with its recommendations, an advisory board was created to assist the Director of the National Park Service on matters pertinent to educational policy and developments in the national parks.
Upon the recommendation of the advisory board an appropriation was requested in the 1931 estimates for the establishment of an educational division in the headquarters of the National Park Service at Washington, to coordinate properly the various educational phases of park work.
Museum expansion continued in Yellowstone National Park under the grant of $118,000, which the American Association of Museums obtained from the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial over a year ago for museum development in that park.
The museum of hydrothermal phenomena at Old Faithful, commenced last year, was completed and opened to the public early in the season.
It proved to be exceptionally popular.
A similar smaller museum is being constructed at Norris Geyser Basin, and a third branch museum is under construction at Madison Junction, near the site of the historic campfire at which the national-park idea was born and the fate of the Yellowstone settled.
The museum in Yosemite National Park, established in 1924 through the cooperation of the American Association of Museums and the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, served nearly half a million people during the year just ended.
Museum service was provided at Lassen Volcanic National Park through the gift of a complete museum and the 40 acres of land on which it stands to the United States Government by B. F. Loomis, of California.
It contains exhibits relating to the volcanic history of Lassen Peak, and an exhibition seismograph, open to public inspection at all times, is installed in a building operated in connection therewith.
The museum at Mesa Verde National Park, made possible entirely through gifts, was very popular during the season and received some interesting acquisitions as a result of archeological work conducted last spring.
Small museum collections were available in some of the other parks and in several of the prehistoric southwestern monuments.
Archeological investigations were carried on in Mesa Verde National Park by Jesse L. Nusbaum, superintendent of the park and archeologist for the Department of the Interior.
As a result of these annual investigations and the restoration of material found the largest and most comprehensive exhibit on the archeology of the Mesa Verde now available to the public is contained in the park museum.
Some excavation work was done at the Chaco Canyon National Monument by the School of American Research of Santa Fe, and repairs were made to the ruins in several of the other southwestern monuments by Park Service officers.
The Director of the National Park Service continued to act as a member of the forest protection board, organized under an order issued by the Chief Coordinator in January, 1927.
The purpose of this board, as broadened with the approval of the coordinator, is to formulate and recommend general policies and plans for the protection of the forests of the country.
Upon the recommendation of the National Park Service, regional boards were organized representing the different Federal agencies concerned.
A close study of the entire situation in each region has been made by the regional boards and plans made for the necessary protective work on publicly administered lands.
Under the direction of the fire-control expert appointed last year detailed surveys of the fire hazards in a number of parks were made and comprehensive plans worked out for the prevention and suppression of forest fires in these areas.
Fire schools were also conducted in several of the parks, and in addition many national park rangers attended fire schools conducted in near-by national forests.
So effective were the control methods employed that fires originating within national parks were held down to a minimum despite the fact that fire hazards were increased by the abnormally dry conditions.
The serious Half Moon fire which menaced Glacier Park, referred to later in this' report, originated outside the park.
The effectiveness of insect-control measures taken by the Bureau of Entomology and the National Park Service during recent years became evident during the past season, when infestation conditions in parks recently under control were better than for several years past.
Wild-animal conditions in the national parks were excellent, due to the generally favorable winter weather and good forage crops.
Several interesting studies of wild-animal problems were inaugurated during the past year through the cooperation of interested organizations and individuals.
Funds for a comprehensive two-year survey of the wild life of all the national parks were provided by George Wright, who has been interested in national-park work for several years.
The object of this investigation, in which Mr. Wright is being assisted by Mr. Joseph Dixon, of the University of California Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, is to study first such outstanding problems as the bear and deer problems in Sequoia and Yosemite Parks, the elk situation in Yellowstone and Yosemite Parks, and the mountain sheep, caribou, wolf, and coyote problems in Mount McKinley.
With funds provided through the generosity of another park friend, Mr. Thomas Cochran, of New York, a special survey of the Yellowstone elk herds and the life habits of these animals was conducted by William Rush.
Studies of both winter and summer conditions were made.
Intensive investigations were also conducted by the Bureau of Biological Survey of elk conditions in the Jackson Hole.
The Museum of Vertebrate Zoology of the University of California continued a survey of the animal life of Lassen Volcanic National Park under the direction of Dr. Joseph Grinnell.
Through a cooperative arrangement between this department and the Department of Commerce, a fish culturist has been detailed by the Bureau of Fisheries to supervise fish-culture operations in the national parks and monuments.
Under the plan of cooperation the fish culturist will devote his time during the summer to piscatorial problems in the national parks, and during the winter months will direct fish-cultural operations at hatcheries of the Bureau of Fisheries located at points outside the parks.
Work was continued on park roads under the program which calls for an ultimate expenditure of $51,000,000 on a 10-year basis.
A total of $5,000,000 was appropriated for road construction during the 1930 fiscal year.
Of this amount $4,000,000 was covered by contractual authorizations permitted by the 1929 appropriation act, and $1,000,000 was made available in cash for current work.
In addition authority was given to contract for additional work up to $2,500,000.
All major highway construction was carried on by the Bureau of Public Roads under the cooperative arrangement between the Departments of Agriculture and Interior.
Appropriations for the national parks and monuments for the fiscal year 1929 amounted to $4,754,015, with additional authority to enter into contractual obligations for road work up to $4,000,000.
The 1930 appropriations were $7,595,940, with additional authority to enter into contractual obligations for road work up to $2,500,000 and with further authority to enter into such obligations for the purchase of private holdings within national parks up to $2,750,000, provided that in the expenditure of this latter fund each dollar of Government funds expended in the purchase of private lands is met by a dollar of donated funds.
Revenues derived from the national parks and monuments during the 1929 fiscal year amounted to $849,272.95, an increase of $41,017.14 over the 1928 revenues and of $22,818.78 over the record 1926 revenues.
The act of March 1, 1873 (17 Stat. 484), authorized the Secretary of the Interior to thereafter exercise all the powers and perform all the duties relating to Territories that were, prior to March 1, 1873, by law or by custom exercised or performed by the Secretary of State.
Under this enactment all the organized Territories created or existing: since 1873 have been under the general supervision of the Secretary of the Interior.
The Governor of Alaska, Hon.
George A. Parks, in his report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1929, states that the economical and industrial conditions in the Territory are satisfactory.
The combined value of the products from fishing and mining, the major industries of the Territory, shows an increase for 1928 of about 25 per cent over that of 1927.
This increased production was accompanied by an increase in the capital investments and the number of persons employed.
During the year labor was employed in nearly every section of the Territory, and there were no labor controversies of any kind.
The balance in the Territorial treasury at the close of business June 30, 1929, was $1,059,153.51.
The combined resources of the Territorial and national banks in the Territory on June 29, 1929, were as follows: Capital, $915,000; surplus and net undivided profits, $815,100; deposits.
Approximate totals for the previous year were: Capital, $915,000; surplus and net undivided profits, $820,250; deposits, $12,196,500.
The increase of more than $500,000 in deposits is significant of the improved economic conditions.
The total assessed valuation of incorporated towns for 1929 was $23,444,571, an increase of $753,885 over 1928.
Federal incometax collections from Alaska, as reported by the collector of internal revenue, increased 5 per cent over 1927.
The report of the collector of customs for the calendar year 1928 shows a gratifying increase over 1927 in the value of commodities produced in and shipped from the Territory.
The total value of exports is $74,849,918, or $17,288,271 more than for the previous year.
Imports were valued at $32,636,833, or $3,739,537 less than 1927.
The balance of trade in favor of Alaska is $42,213,085, as compared with $20,566,605 for last year, an increase of more than 50 per cent.
The increase is accounted for almost entirely by the large salmon pack.
The outstanding feature of the year from an economic viewpoint was the remarkable improvement in the production of the salmon fisheries.
As compared with the number of salmon caught in 1927 the catch in 1928 discloses an increase of approximately 86 per cent.
This is accounted for primarily by the large runs of red salmon in western Alaska and pink salmon in the southeastern district.
The most notable increases were 227 per cent in southeastern Alaska and 66 per cent in western Alaska.
The value of the fisheries products, exclusive of aquatic furs, was $54,545,588, an increase of $14,382,288 over 1927.
This represents the worth of manufactured product.
It is estimated that the value of the catch to the fishermen was approximately $17,343,000.
Salmon and herring make up the principal part of the catch.
The round weight of salmon catch landed by fishermen was approximately 517,069,403 pounds and of herring approximately 134,020,216 pounds.
Thirty-one thousand and eighty-six persons were employed in the commercial fisheries in 1928, an increase of 2,214 over the preceding year.
Of these 17,326 were whites, 5,614 were natives, and the rest Filipinos, Japanese, Chinese, Mexicans, and Negroes, in the order named.
The value of the canned salmon in 1928 represents about 96 per cent of the total value of the industry.
Twenty-four thousand four hundred and twenty-eight persons were employed to can 6,083,903 cases, valued at $45,383,885.
One hundred and fifty-three canneries were operated as compared with 145 in 1927.
The production of mild-cured salmon, while considerably less than in 1927, was not below the average for the past several years.
Twenty plants were operated and employed 1,970 persons to pack 4,193 tierces of kings, 1,650 tierces of cohoes, and 7 tierces of chums, a total of 5,850 tierces, valued at $1,101,871.
Efforts to utilize the by-products of the canning industry have been successful, and during the season 1,421,644 pounds of fertilizer, valued at $44,109, and 43,390 gallons of oil, valued at $16,420, were derived from this source.
The total production of the herring industry was somewhat greater than in 1927.
An important feature was the discovery of large schools of herring in the vicinity of Dutch Harbor.
Sixty-five plants, employing 1,992 persons, produced 16,056,595 pounds of Scotch-cured herring, 20,004,164 pounds of meal, 2,543,600 gallons of 1.
The halibut industry suffered a decline in prices and in the quantity of fish caught in 1928.
One thousand two hundred forty-one persons were employed in this industry and they caught 31,567,000 pounds, valued at $3,094,000, as compared with 34,491,283 pounds, valued at $3,805,088, in 1927.
The problem of preserving the halibut fisheries has occupied the attention of the International Halibut Commission for several years and as a result of their investigations it is apparent that the fishing grounds bordering Canada and Alaska have been seriously depleted.
If these fisheries are to be rehabilitated, it is probable that fishing will have to be restricted for a period of years.
The output from the cod fisheries declined about 50 per cent under last year because none of the large plants were operated.
There was a sharp decline in the whaling industry, both in the number of people employed and the value of the catch.
Two hundred and thirty persons captured 402 whales, which yielded 730,650 gallons of oil, valued at $343,786; 93,750 gallons of sperm oil, valued at $36,748; and 1,326 tons of fertilizer, valued at $73,740, or a total of $454,274 as compared with $622,412 in 1927.
The census of the seal herd on the Pribilof Islands is computed in August each year, and the Bureau of Fisheries estimates the increase for 1928 to be 62,643, or 7.7 per cent.
The total number of seals of all ages and classes in the herd on August 10, 1928, is given as 871,513.
In 1911, when the Government assumed control of the herds, there were about 132,000 seals of all classes on the islands, and the results that have been achieved in building up the herds to more than six times the original herd in 18 years is a striking example of what may be accomplished by proper methods of control and wise utilization of the surplus.
While the herds have been increasing, they have been made to produce many thousands of sealskins for the market, and each year the number of marketable skins increases.
Only bachelor seals are taken for their skins.
The seal industry will continue to be a source of revenue, and there is no longer danger of the extermination of the herds so long as they are maintained under the supervision of the Government.
Thirty-one thousand and ninety-nine sealskins were taken from the Pribilof Islands herds during the calendar year 1928.
This is an increase of 6,157, or 24.2 per cent, over the catch for 1927.
During the year 28,929 skins were sold at public auction and at private sales authorized by the Secretary of Commerce for a total of $896,383.40.
In 1927 20,315 skins were sold for a gross price of $718,101.
The revenue derived from the Pribilof Islands is aug. mented by the trapping of white and blue foxes, which are fed with the by-products of the sealing industry.
During the trapping season 1928-29 544 blue and 9 white fox skins were taken and prepared for market.
October 15, 1928, 278 blues and 15 whites, taken the previous season, were sold at public auction for $21,290.
In 1928 the total value of all mineral products is reported to be $14,128,000.
This is $176,000 under the 1927 valuation.
The decline is due wholly to the decrease in the quantity and value of copper that was mined.
Although the total mineral production is less than that for 1927, it is significant that the gold production increased very materially.
The mining industry has been stimulated during the past year by new developments and by assistance given to prospectors; hence it is almost certain that the production from the mines will show an increase next year.
For many years the production of gold from placer mines exceeded that of the lodes, but in recent years there has been a gradual change in the situation, and last year the production from the lodes exceeded that derived from the placers.
The total gold production from all sources in 1928 is estimated to be $6,775,000, as compared with $5,927,000 in 1927.
Copper-bearing rocks are distributed throughout the territory but commercial-ore bodies are mined in only two localities, Kennecott, in the Copper River district, and on Latouche Island.
The production from these mines shows a sharp decline.
In 1927 the value of the copper was estimated to be $7,250,000, while in 1928 it decreased to $6,100,000.
There has been a steady decline in the production of copper each year since 1923, and further decrease is inevitable unless new ore deposits are discovered.
Approximately 75 per cent of the silver produced in the Territory is recovered from the copper ores, hence the decline in copper production is accompanied by a decrease in the output of silver.
The value of the silver recovered is estimated to be $273,000 as compared to $356,000 in 1927.
An increase is noted in the production of lead, marble, limestone, tin, and platinum.
During the year a new industry was initiated on Dall Island, situated about 50 miles west of Ketchikan.
The Pacific Coast Cement Co. opened a quarry for the production of limestone to supply a cement plant located near Seattle.
This quarry has a capacity of several thousand tons per day and no doubt will continue in operation for many years.
Alaska contains large quantities of suitable limestone and largely increased production may be expected.
The coal mines in the Territory produced 125,289 tons, valued at $624,000.
This is 20 per cent greater than last year and exceeds the production of any previous year.
Practically all of the coal is produced in two distriets, both tributary to the Alaska Railroad.
The Matanuska Field near Anchorage and the Healy River area near Fairbanks supply their respective districts.
Petroleum was produced in only one district in the Territory.
A'number of shallow wells near Katalla in the vicinity of Bering River produce a small quantity of paraffin-base oil.
This is refined locally and the various distillates are sold in local markets.
The report of the general manager of the Alaska Railroad discloses that there was a decrease in the revenues derived from transportation of freight and passengers.
The revenue from the river boats that are operated in conjunction with the railroad increased about 3 per cent.
The revenue from all sources, including nonoperating income, was $1,269,634.07, and the total deficit, all expenses except, charges to capital account, was $950,711.74.
Shipments of coal increased 16 per cent, but this was not sufficient to overcome the decline in shipments of machinery and construction supplies to the Fairbanks Exploration Co.
In the interest of colonization along the railroad a traveling representative was appointed, and he has been visiting farming communities in various sections of the West for the purpose of furnishing information to individuals and prospective settlers.
It is expected that through his efforts the population along the railroad will be increased.
There was a gratifying increase in the tourist travel, and it is expected that with the completion of the wagon road through Mount McKinley National Park there will be a marked advance in the number of visitors each year.
The national forests of Alaska embrace an area of approximately 21,000,000 acres and contain the greater part of the commercial timber in the Territory.
These forests are administered by the United States Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, and their value to Alaska and the Nation may be appreciated when it is understood that they comprise 13 per cent of the total forest reserves of the United States and contain about 85,000,000,000 board feet of timber.
Investigations by the Forest Service indicate that the forests will yield 1,000,000,000 board feet each year in perpetuity and that the present yearly cut is 56,000,000, or 5.6 per cent of what can be taken without àanger of depleting the supply.
Much of the timber, especially in the Tongass Forest, is valuable chiefly for the manufacture of pulp and paper.
Large areas have been awarded under contracts to paper-manufacturing companies and the preliminary plans for construction of the necessary plants have been completed.
It is known that there are more than 550,000 horsepower as yet undeveloped in the regions tributary to the forests.
The utilization of this power and the timber resources will place the manufacturing of pulp and paper in the list of Alaska's major industries.
The Territory cooperates with the Federal Government in the construction of roads and trails.
The Alaska Road Commission, War Department, is responsible for the construction of roads and trails outside of the national forest areas, and the Bureau of Public Roads is charged with similar work in the forest reserves.
In the biennium 1927–28 the Territory appropriated $500,365.41 for roads, trails, and aviation fields, and the cost of administration to the Territory was 1.5 per cent of this amount.
This clearly shows the benefits of the cooperative arrangements.
In 1928 the new construction consisted of 45 miles of road, 48½2 miles of sled road, 104 miles of trail, 440 linear feet of bridges, 10 airplane landing fields, and 23 shelter cabins.