That working people and their families are among the chief beneficiaries of stable economic growth was demonstrated once again in fiscal year 1989.
Employment increased by 2.9 million, bringing the total new job growth since late 1982 to more than 20 million.
The 119.2 Americans who held jobs during the final quarter constituted 63.3 percent of the nation's working-age population, with both of these figures being all-time records.
The average overall unemployment rate of 5.2 percent was the lowest in 15 years.
Employment was up for blacks, Hispanics and women, with women continuing to make the biggest gains.
Three-fifths of the increased employment in fiscal year 1989 occurred among women, and women have accounted for over half of the employment gains since 1982.
Strong increases in jobs for blacks and Hispanics in 1989 continued a trend which has produced an employment increase of 36 percent for blacks and 48 percent for Hispanics since the low point in economic activity at the end of 1982.
Real disposable income also rose in 1989, increasing 4 ercent as inflation remained under control.
Recognizing that a skilled labor force is the key to economic growth and prosperity, the Labor Department pressed ahead with its campaign to emphasize and improve education and training for American workers.
After a year-long study that included a series of public hearings across the nation, the Secretary of Labor's Commission on Workforce Quality and Labor Market Efficiency called for a wide range of actions by government, business and labor to combat an emerging workforce crisis.
The 21-member commission, composed of representatives of business, labor, government, the education community and the public, called for fundamental changes in worker education and training to deal with a growing imbalance between workforce skills and the increasingly demanding jobs the nation's economy is creating.
Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole said that the skills gap cited by the commission "must be bridged if our remarkable economic expansion is to continue, and if we are to succeed in the ever more competitive global marketplace."
She pointed out that legislation proposed by the Administration would accomplish a key commission recommendation by improving the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), including targeting more resources on those most in need of remedial education.
Secretary Dole also emphasized the importance of commission recommendations to improve training for adults already in the workforce, ease conflicts between work and family responsibilities, increase the portability of pension benefits, and make the Labor Department a clearinghouse for information on employee training.
The commission's findings and recommendations augmented a number of reports on key workforce matters issued earlier in the year by the Labor Department.
These included a report on labor shortages and a report urging reconsideration of traditional recruiting, training, and benefit packages for older workers to encourage later retirement.
Both the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) took significant steps in the setting of standards aimed at reducing safety and health hazards in the workplace.
Final standards on air contaminants, hazardous waste operations and emergency response were among 18 major actions on health or safety standards taken by OSHA during the year.
OSHA standard-setting activity also included publication of a proposed rule to protect more than five million health care workers against the hazards of AIDS, hepatitis and other blood-borne diseases.
MSHA issued a proposal to revise air quality standards for mines, an action that could have a major beneficial impact on the health of mine workers.
John Morrell and Company in Sioux Falls, SD, that resulted in $4.3 million in proposed penalties for serious worker safety and health hazards.
Penalties of $2.7 million were proposed against Friction Division Products of Trenton, NJ, for willful violations relating to asbestos exposure, and OSHA took action in federal court to compel the company to immediately cease exposing employees to serious asbestos hazards.
MSHA's activities to protect miners included establishment of a special agency task force to identify illegal or "wildcat" coal mines that have not registered with the government so they can be inspected.
Convictions were obtained against a number of violators and MSHA plans to continue this effort.
Responding to a growing problem in the meatpacking industry, OSHA began planning for a special emphasis program that will focus on carpal tunnel syndrome and other disorders associated with jobs that require workers to perform repetitive motions.
OSHA and MSHA continued to emphasize the importance of employer cooperation in making the workplace safer.
OSHA's cooperative program includes on-site consultation visits, recognition of exemplary worksites, safety and health grants and training courses.
MSHA inspectors visited many mines at the operators' request to help them comply with safety and health regulations and provided grants to states for use in their safety and health training programs.
MSHA-produced videotapes with safety messages were played more than 150,000 times in workers' changing rooms at underground coal mines.
Some $122 million in back minimum wages and overtime pay was obtained for 411,000 workers as a result of enforcement actions taken by the Employment Standards Administration (ESA).
The agency conducted more than 74,000 compliance actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
A landmark 11-year sex and race discrimination case initiated by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) came to a successful conclusion when Harris Savings and Trust Bank of Chicago agreed to a record $14 million settlement.
The $14 million, to be distributed to women and minority group members who were employed at the bank between May 1973 and December 1988, is the largest back-pay amount ever obtained by the Federal Government in a sex or race discrimination case.
In addition to the back pay, the bank agreed to change its affirmative action plan and to provide training to enable women and minorities to overcome problems which might limit their advancement in the firm's workforce.
The OFCCP's ongoing efforts to assure equal employment opportunity in government contracts produced 603 agreements during the fiscal year under which contractors committed to almost $37 million in outlays for pay adjustments, training, recruitment or similar purposes.
More than $21 million of this was for back pay awards to some 6,600 women, minorities, persons with handicaps and veterans.
OFCCP completed 6,232 compliance reviews, entered into 2,568 conciliation agreements and 1,988 letters of commitment, and recommended 115·enforcement actions that could result in firms losing their eligibility for Federal contracts.
There were 599 cases pending at the end of the year, down sharply from the 3,208 carried over from fiscal 1988.
OFCCP again emphasized voluntary compliance by providing almost 57,000 hours of technical assistance to contractors to help them comply with affirmative action requirements.
In addition, 15 new liaison groups were formed during the year to explore compliance problems and solutions with employers in a cooperative setting.
Over $2 billion in medical and rehabilitation services and wage loss benefits was paid by the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs to about 400,000 injured workers under the Federal Employees Compensation Act, Black Lung Benefits Act and Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
A variety of new initiatives, including visits by nurses to injured workers, enabled a record 1,718 injured Federal employees and longshore and harbor workers to return to work through rehabilitation.
Final regulations were issued during the year to revise restrictions on working at home that had existed for almost half a century.
Restrictions on homework were lifted, subject to a certification process, in six industries: jewelry manufacturing, gloves and mittens, button and buckle manufacturing, handkerchiefs, embroideries, and knitted outerwear.
Homework bans were retained only in the women's apparel industry (pending further study) and in jewelry manufacturing operations that entail safety and health hazards.
Applications to use homeworkers under the new regulations were received from 60 employers.
Final regulations also were issued under the 1988 law that sharply restricts the use of lie detector tests by employers.
ESA conducted 51 investigations involving the use of prohibited lie detector tests and obtained compliance agreement in almost all the cases.
A major effort was launched to enable the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) to play a more effective role in preparing minorities and the disadvantaged for the more demanding but rewarding jobs of the future.
Drawing on research and analysis by Employment and Training Administration (ETA) staff and the work of an advisory committee appointed by the Secretary of Labor, the Administration proposed amending the JTPA to target more of its resources on workers most in need of help to succeed in a changing job market.
Secretary Dole said that although JTPA's 68 percent job placement record was "unprecedented," the program could be made even better.
The proposed changes would improve the targeting of JTPA to those most in need or at risk, enhance the quality of JTPA services, and promote coordination of human resource programs serving the disadvantaged.
The amendments also would create a program of grants to fund comprehensive services to youth living in high poverty areas and establish a year-round youth program of education, training and work experience.
The Veterans' Employment and Training Service took steps to assure that employment help for veterans goes to those most in need by redirecting the spending of veterans funds under JTPA.
The restructuring calls for minorities, Vietnam theater, and special disabled veterans to comprise 75 percent of those served under JTPA's program for veterans.
A study found that these three groups have the highest unemployment rates among veterans and the longest periods of unemployment between jobs.
Finishing touches were put on an important legislative initiative when ETA issued final regulations under the so-called plant closing law.
Enacted in 1988, this law establishes a comprehensive program of services to help dislocated workers return to productive employment as quickly as possible.
In keeping with its emphasis on helping workers become or remain productive, ETA supported a series of demonstration projects designed to identify quickly and assist those workers drawing unemployment benefits who are most likely to have difficulty finding another job.
Enforcement actions by the Pension and Welfare Benefit Administration (PWBA) were responsible for recovering more than $111 million for employee benefit plans nationwide, with $88 million of the total coming through voluntary compliance and almost $23 million as a result of litigation.
The agency's strategy of concentrating enforcement activity against organizations and institutions that provide services to many different benefit plans continued to pay dividends.
The more than 500 cases initiated against banks, major brokerage firms, insurance companies and providers of dental plans resulted in $49 million in restored assets and prohibited transaction reversals for pension and welfare plans.
More than $8 million--the highest amount ever--was obtained for plan participants who sought PWBA's help in securing payments to which they were entitled but couldn't get on their own.
The handling of stock by investment managers continued to receive attention.
Investment managers were advised that the voting of proxies on stock shares held by plans would be monitored to assure conformance with ERISA requirements.
A joint policy statement by PWBA and the Treasury Department dealt with investment decisions by plans involved in corporate tender offers, takeovers and mergers.
Investment managers are not automatically required to tender shares, the statement pointed out, but must make their decision based on the facts and circumstances of the individual case.
Looking to the future, PWBA began to develop regulations for carrying out the responsibilities it will assume under the Federal Employees Retirement System Act.
Secretary Dole, accompanied by her husband, Senator Robert Dole, visited Poland as President Bush's representative at the first meeting between top-level American officials and the prime minister of Poland's new non-communist government.
The Secretary directed the Department's International Labor Affairs Bureau to develop and oversee the Department's plans to provide technical assistance to Poland and Hungary.
Almost $2 million in embezzled union funds were recovered and more than $265,000 in fines were imposed by the courts as a result of enforcement actions taken by the Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act.
OLMS investigations led to 168 indictments and other criminal actions during the year and 149 convictions and pre-trial agreements.
The Bureau of Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative Programs responded to continuing change in labor relations policies and practices, both at home and abroad, by offering new services and materials.
New technical assistance programs were developed and a variety of research reports and case studies issued to help practitioners create and maintain joint labor-management efforts in the workplace.
Child care arrangements for working mothers remained a priority concern of the Women's Bureau.
A major bureau project, the Clearinghouse on Implementation of Child Care and Eldercare Services, provides information on employersponsored child care options.
Other issues receiving considerable attention included eldercare, flexible benefits, nontraditional jobs, training opportunities, and youth at risk.
Successful prosecutions following investigations carried out by the Office of the Inspector General resulted in more than $16.5 million in recoveries, restitutions, fines, settlements, cost efficiencies and administrative penalties.
Among the major accomplishments of the Bureau of Labor Statistics were completion of a survey of employers' antidrug programs, preparation of special reports to Congress on the labor market status of older workers and Vietnam-era veterans, and acceleration of the monthly release schedule for the Consumer Price Index.
The concerted effort launched in 1988 to improve the Department's own productivity and make it a better place to work continued unabated in 1989.
Employees were offereu information and assistance on obtaining care for children and elderly dependents.
Membership in the National Office Fitness Center increased to more than 1,000, and four regional fitness center proposals were approved.
Emphasis on recruitment and upgrading of groups which are underrepresented in the department's workforce resulted in increases in Hispanic employment and more women and minorities in the higher grades.
Completing its first full year as the department's primary training resource, the DOL Academy significantly increased the quality training opportunities available to all employees.
Academy highlights included the introduction of required training for clerical employees and new training requirements for supervisors.
Major ETA initiatives during the periods covered in this report concern: a new legislative proposal that would amend the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), enabling the nationwide JTPA training system to better target services to those who most need education and training; a comprehensive review of the concept of apprenticeship training; and the operation of a series of demonstration projects to test the feasibility of identifying potential unemployment insurance (UI) exhaustees early in their benefit period and providing them several different forms of assistance in order to facilitate their early return to work.
These activities, and other developments, are reported below by individual program or agency function.
For those activities that operate on a program year cycle, the discussion covers program year (PY) 1988 (July 1988 to June 1989).
For those that operate on a fiscal year basis, the information is provided for fiscal year 1989 (October 1988 to September 1989).
The Job Training Partnership Act authorizes the largest system of Federal job training programs.
The bulk of JTPA funds are allocated to States and to more than 600 local service delivery areas (SDAs) that administer programs for economically disadvantaged youth and adults and dislocated workers.
The legislation also authorizes various forms of assistance to other target groups, provides for a program of research, demonstration, and evaluation, and mandates a system of standards to measure the performance of individual program operators.
In PY 1988, the Administration proposed legislation to amend the Job Training Partnership Act.
The proposals incorporate the recommendations of an advisory committee appointed by the Secretary.
See policy and planning section.)
Under Title II-A, JTPA provides block grants to each State to fund training and other employment-related services for adults and youth.
Twenty-two percent of a State's II-A funds are reserved for statewide activities, and the remainder is allocated to SDAs within the State.
Expenditures for these programs totaled more than $1.8 billion in PY 1988, and over 1.2 million youth and adults were served.
Of participants leaving Title II-A programs operated by SDAs, 45 percent were youth, 53 percent were female, 50 percent were minorities, 26 percent had been receiving welfare, and 27 percent were high school dropouts.
Sixty percent of program terminees entered employment, with an average starting wage of $5.07.
Youth terminees had a positive termination rate of 80 percent.
Over 90 percent of SDA enrollees were economically disadvantaged.
The Summer Youth Employment and Training Program (JTPA Title II-B) provides job opportunities as well as training and educational services for economically disadvantaged youth, ages 14 to 21.
The 1989 summer program served over 600,000 participants, with expenditures totaling $696.9 million.
Fifty percent of the participants were female, 69 percent minorities, and 4 percent school dropouts.
Title III of JTPA authorizes dislocated worker programs which in PY 1988 served more than 207,000 persons, workers who had been laid off or terminated from their jobs.
Expenditures totaled more than $252 million.
Forty-three percent of those leaving the program had previously been unemployed for at least 15 of the prior 26 weeks.
Sixty-nine percent of program terminees entered employment, at an average hourly wage of $7.54.
Funds for Title III programs were allocated by formula to the States, with 25 percent retained in the Secretary's National Reserve Account.
PY 1988 was a year of transition from the old Title III of JTPA to the new Title III, the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance (EDWAA) Program, which was authorized by the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 and became effective July 1, 1989.
During PY 1988, national and regional planning conferences related to EDWAA were held and some of the new program's provisions were implemented.
EDWAA provides readjustment and retraining services and needs-related payments for dislocated workers.
Eighty percent of EDWAA funds are distributed by formula to the States and 20 percent are reserved for the Secretary for demonstration programs and multi-State or industry-wide projects.
Half of a State's funds are to be allocated by formula to sub-State areas for provision of training and other services.
Up to 40 percent of a State's allocation can be used by the Governor for State responsibilities, which include a rapid response unit that deals with substantial layoffs and plant closures within the State.
Ten percent of a State's allocation can be retained by the Governor for distribution during the program year to sub-State areas according to need.
Job Corps II," a series of pilot and demonstration projects designed to increase the program's effectiveness, continued to be the program's major initiative in PY 1988.
Job Corps II also focuses on the development of stronger ties between Job Corps centers and local JTPA programs, arrangements for dependent children, and the enhancement of services to foster care youth.
Assessment of all major Job Corps II projects was undertaken during PY 1988, with final evaluations scheduled for completion during program year 1989.
Competency-based curricula were developed and implemented for 15 occupational clusters to complement the 10 implemented the previous year.
These 25 occupational clusters account for approximately 80 percent of the Job Corps vocational enrollment.
A new Occupational Exploration Program (OEP) and a revised World of Work (WOW) curricula were written, tested, and issued during the program year.
The OEP and WOW curricula are competency-based and contain considerable amounts of visual materials to promote student comprehension and interest.
ETA began development of a Social Skills Training program for Job Corps, an effort to expand student learning beyond academic and vocational education.
When completed, it will consist of a structured curriculum aimed at developing student competency in social and interpersonal skills.
Nationwide implementation of the program is expected in the spring of 1991.
In PY 1988, ETA also initiated a three-year project to totally reconstruct and revise the Job Corps education curriculum.
This completely modernized curriculum will include competency-based objectives; new printed, audio-visual, and computer-assisted instructional materials; and a computer-driven classroom management system.
JTPA Title IV programs for Native Americans are funded through grants to Indian tribes, other Native American communities, and various related organizations.
34,000 participants received a wide variety of job-related service in PY 1988 under these programs, at a cost of $6l million.
Thirty percent of the participants were enrolled in classroom training, 10 percent in on-the-job training, 21 percent in work experience, and 6 percent in community service employment.
Another 33 percent received various supportive services.
Grantees' performance continued to improve in PY 1988.
ETA officials made approximately 85 on-site visits to grantees to monitor performance.
They also participated in five regional and one national grantee-sponsored meetings and provided technical assistance and information.
A training and technical assistance contractor conducted an additional four training seminars for grantees and made approximately 50 on-site technical assistance visits.
Title IV of JTPA also authorizes migrant and seasonal farmworker programs which, at a total cost of $63 million, served nearly 55,000 persons in PY 1988.
Some 10,800 participants received classroom training, 8,600 were enrolled in on-the-job training, and 1,900 were placed in work experience positions.
ETA continued its emphasis on farmworker youth employability enhancement, and about 9,500 participants aged 14 to 21 took part in these activities.
As in previous years, grantees were instructed to refer eligible youth to Job Corps centers.
About 95 percent of the programs had formal agreements with vocational centers or other private training institutions.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) transferred $5 million to farmworker grantees to provide emergency assistance in drought-stricken States.
Nearly 19,000 drought-affected farmworkers were served, at an average assistance level of $262 a person.
Title IV in PY 1988.
Participants suffered from blindness, deafness, epilepsy, mental retardation, and other physical and severe emotional problems.
The seven national organizations that administer these programs for ETA were granted a total of $3.6 million during the period.
During the 1988 program year, 30 new projects were funded as part of a comprehensive effort to seek more effective approaches and strategies for addressing the needs of such increasingly difficult-to-serve groups as at-risk youth, youth offenders, displaced homemakers, and workers lacking basic workplace skills.
The bulk of the projects (23) were selected for funding via a competitive solicitation designed to improve State and local coordination in developing and implementing comprehensive programs to meet the multi-faceted needs of the target groups.
Overall objectives were: to detail the major problems involved in developing operational linkages among agencies; to provide viable solutions to overcoming barriers to interagency coordination involving JTPA programs; and to identify effective planning and implementation approaches for demonstrating potentially successful coordination and program models.
The other seven new projects were one-year initiatives undertaken by seven of the ongoing national partnership grantees under a limited "partnership enhancement" solicitation.
For the most part, these involved efforts to improve the quality of services provided, expand services to additional target groups, and increase coordination and linkages with other support services/agencies.
JTPA requires the Secretary to establish a system of standards for the various titles that measure program performance.
For the PY 1988-89 two-year planning cycle, the number of performance standards for Title II-A was increased from seven to 12, with the understanding that Governors need select only eight.
Guidelines require at least one of the eight to be a "quality of placement" standard (either the average wage at placement or weekly earnings at follow-up, or both) and another to be a noncost youth standard (either the positive termination rate, the employability enhancement rate, or the youth entered employment rate).
One of the five new Title II-A standards addresses the acquisition of youth employment competencies in specific skill areas (preemployment/work maturity, basic education, and/or job specific skills); the other four are designed to determine the employment and earnings status of adult and adult welfare participants 13 weeks after termination.
Governors were required to set an entered employment rate standard for Title III in PY 1988 and were encouraged to set an average wage at placement goal.
PY 1988 marked the second full program year in which the new model-based process was utilized to establish individually adjusted performance standards for the nationally supervised Title IV programs for Indians and other Native Americans and for migrant and seasonal farmworkers.
Indian and Native American (INA) grantees are required to meet three performance measures: entered employment rate, positive termination rate, and cost per positive termination.
They also have an optional community benefit project measure.
Migrant and seasonal farmworker (MSFW) grantees are required to meet two performance measures: entered employment rate and cost per entered employment.
ETA completed the following performance standards activities for both INA and MSFW grantees in PY 1988: assessing PY 1987 final results, monitoring PY 1988 grantee performance, and developing the performance standards planning levels for PY 1989.
ETA continued its development and implementation of performance standards for Job Corps centers by adopting an average length of stay retention standard.
This replaced the 90-day and 180-day retention standards.)
Education (GED attainment and learning gains in math and reading) and placement standards continued in place for PY 1988.
More than 100,000 low-income elderly persons were provided part-time jobs under the Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP) in PY 1988.
The program's appropriation was $331 million for the period, during which time over 24 percent of the participants moved from subsidized to nonsubsidized positions.
Many of these workers were placed in jobs in the private sector while others became part of the regular staff at the community agencies where they worked while enrolled in SCSEP.
To accommodate the increasing number of older workers in the general population and make the program available to more eligible persons, ETA encouraged SCSEP operators to coordinate their community service jobs with training and job referral opportunities available through such programs as JTPA.
Approximately 350,000 apprentices received training in 45,000 registered programs in fiscal year 1989.
During the period, ETA received about 28,000 public inquiries regarding apprenticeship, and BAT staff conducted about 24,000 promotional (or technical) on-site visits, 1,800 compliance reviews, and 2,150 program reviews to ensure quality training.
ETA recognizes 812 occupations as apprenticeable.
Other important components of the Apprenticeship 2000 review during the year included: an international symposium in conjunction with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the publication of a series of short-term research papers related to various areas of the apprenticeship concept, publication of an analysis and summary of responses to two focus papers on expansion themes and the award of three grants and two contracts to develop and demonstrate a number of approaches for expanding structured, work-based training.
ETA continued in PY 1988 to review means by which the public employment service (ES) could better serve both employers and job applicants in the 1990s and beyond, in recognition of the changing demographics of the work force, the low skill level of many new labor force entrants, and the assessment and retraining needs of workers displaced by a rapidly changing economy.
To this end, over $1.5 million in demonstration grants were awarded to eight States to test innovative ES practices.
The focus of the 18-month projects was on improving services through such approaches as "one-stop-shop" programs, increasing private sector involvement in local ES activities, and enhancing the State role in developing ES policy.
Three ES information exchange forums were held so that national, State, and local policymakers and planners could share information on successful and innovative approaches developed by State employment security agencies (SESAs).
From 142 models submitted by SESAs, 60 were selected for presentation at forum workshops.
Following the forums, a monograph containing highlights of the meetings was distributed to all States and a videotape was developed for State use.
In the meantime, the ES continued serving the immediate needs of employers and jobseekers.
In PY 1988, the ES registered 18.5 million applicants and provided some reportable service to 6.6 million of them.
Over 3.8 million applicants were placed in a job or obtained one after receiving services.
Labor exchange expenditures for the period totaled $727.8 million.
In FY 1989, ETA and the Labor Department's Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veteran's Employment and Training renewed their consolidated agreement with the Employers' National Job Service Committee (ENJSC).
The agreement includes special emphasis on involving employers in planning employment and training programs at State and community levels and recuiting workers through the public ES.
As required by the JTPA amendments to the Wagner-Peyser Act, the Interstate Job Bank (IJB) compiles listings of hard-to-fill jobs identified by SESAs and distributes them to more than 2,000 local ES offices and to some libraries and colleges.
Over 23,000 job openings are available in the IJB on any given day.
In FY 1989, 130,896 new job openings were listed with the IJB.
This compares to 89,965 new job openings listed in FY 1988, a 45 percent increase.
SESAs improved their automation capabilities, and by the end of the fiscal year nine States were able to telecommunicate directly with the IJB to exchange job order data.
Other States use computer tape exchange to list and obtain job opening information.)
During FY 1989, six States installed an on-line applicant self-search system that jobseekers can use to find out-of-State jobs.
The IJB Center also supported a new multi-State Job Bank pilot project in five contiguous States, providing applicant self-search capability via computer terminal into all job listings in the five-State area.
Automated Labor Exchange), is available for installation in any Štate ES agency.
Another self-search system for ES/IJB use, which employs touch-screen technology, was under initial development during FY 1989.
SESAs have responsibilities related to the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program.
SESAs are designated by law to determine individual eligibility for the nine TJTC target groups and to certify employers for the Federal tax credit.
Over 497,300 certifications documenting employers'claim for a tax credit for hiring workers from one of the nine traditionally hard-to-place target groups were issued in calendar year 1988.
Increasingly, States are automating or streamlining processing for the TJTC program.
In fiscal 1989, ETA sponsored three multi-regional workshops to enable States to exchange techniques, information, and experience with TJTC and to help them to understand the limitations imposed by Congress.
Many States were short of TJTC administrative funds during the year, and sought and found ways to economize and other sources of funding that allowed them to continue this special placement incentive.
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act, the Department (through ETA's U.S. Employment Service) has responsibility for certifying that the use of certain categories of foreign workers will not adversely affect job opportunities, wages, and working conditions of U.S. workers.
Such certification is required as a condition to issuance of visas by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.)
In FY 1989, 60,849 applications for permanent and temporary labor certification for nonagricultural jobs were approved.
In calendar 1988, 23,745 temporary agricultural jobs were certified to be filled by nonimmigrant foreign workers.
Regular State WIN programs are jointly administered by ETA and the Family Support Administration of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
Employment and training services are provided by State employment security agencies; supportive social services, such as child care, are provided by State welfare agencies.
Since 1982, as a Congressional experiment, States have had the choice of conducting a WIN demonstration program (instead of a regular WIN program).
Demonstration programs are administered solely by HHS.
In 1988, Congress passed a major new welfare initiative, the Family Support Act, the heart of which is the Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training (JOBS) program, which begain July 1989.
JOBS is being administered by HHS, with linkages to other human service programs such as JTPA.
States have until October 1, 1990, to implement the JOBS program, at which time the WIN program authority terminates.
At the end of FY 1989, more than 500,000 clients were registered in WIN regular and demonstration programs.
During the fiscal year WIN staff placed an estimated 257,585 registrants into unsubsidized jobs, nearly 66 percent of whom earned enough to leave welfare.
During calendar year 1988, 16.1 million initial claims for unemployment benefits were filed with State employment security agencies.
There were 86.8 million weeks compensated for total unemployment and 7.3 million weeks compensated for partial unemployment during the period.
Revenues collected by the States for the program totaled $17.7 billion and benefits paid totaled $12.6 billion.
Fiscal year 1989 saw improvement in State benefit financing and in repayment of loans from the Federal Unemployment Trust Fund.
These loans, provided to States to assure payment of benefits when the individual State trust fund balances became inadequate, had peaked as of March 31, 1984, when 26 States had outstanding loans totaling $14 billion.
As of August 31, 1989, the balance of such loans had been reduced to $0.8 billion (interest free), and only one State had an outstanding loan.
As of June 30, 1989, all States had a positive balance in their individual trust funds, with an aggregate balance of $35.6 billion.
ETA continued several unemployment insurance (UI) initiatives during fiscal year 1989 to improve the integrity of the program and to test alternative and innovative ways to accelerate and smooth the transition to reemployment for UI recipients, especially for the long-term unemployed and the displaced worker.
ETA is committed to the development and implementation of a comprehensive, integrated approach to the improvement of the accuracy and timeliness of UI program activities, including the collection of revenues and the payment of benefits.
A major component of this effort is the UI Quality Control (QC) program.
Fiscal year 1989 was the second full year of operation of the first portion of the UI/QC program, Benefits Quality Control (BQC).
During the year, results from the first year of BQC operations were published by all States.
Overall, the average "overpayment" error rate was 10.1 percent of all weeks claimed, while the average "underpayment" error was 0.9 percent.
The States found that errors in the application of the "work search" provision of their laws accounted for the vast majority of the reported "overpayment" errors.
The results of the UI/QC program are being used by the SESAs to target staff training and program improvement efforts.
Five State tax experts contributed to the RQC design, and draft design material was reviewed by a steering committee of Federal regional UI tax staff and a panel of State tax experts.
A Federal Register notice also solicited comment on a series of basic design issues; 23 of the 28 respondents to the notice were SESAs.
In FY 1989, ETA initiated the Performance Measurement Review project, a comprehensive examination of alternative approaches to measuring SESAs' UI performance and the interrelationships between currently existing components of the UI oversight system.
The objectives of the project are: to review the Secretáry's legal responsibilities for the UI program; to identify and examine alternative methods of evaluating SESA UI performance and to determine what constitutes a minimum level of performance; and to examine linkages between components of the UI oversight program.
A January 19, 1989, notice in the Federal Register announced the start of the project.
Fiscal Year 1989 was devoted to an extensive research effort.
The laws and regulations pertaining to the UI system were studied to identify SESA UI service requirements; the existing data collection and reporting systems were studied to identify gaps and duplications and to assess the validity of the performance data currently available; the history of the existing UI performance review programs was studied to examine the rationale behind the existing programs; performance measurement systems in other Federal agencies were examined to identify innovative approaches that might have applications for the UI system; and factors impacting SESA performance were identified.
ETA also began preparing recommendations for improved methodologies to be used to measure SESA UI performance.
This project is being coordinated with the RQC effort.
For more than 50 years, the UI program has provided temporary income support to eligible unemployed workers.
These payments have provided workers who have been gainfully employed, and who have lost their job through no fault of their own, with partial replacement of lost wages.
UI benefit payments, which generally last for up to 26 weeks, are designed to sustain these workers during temporary periods of job loss due to recessions and short-term downturns in the economy.
Emerging trends in the economy and in the demographics of the work force have created new labor market conditions that make the reemployment of structurally unemployed workers a key issue for the UI system.
A series of demonstration projects has been initiated to test the feasibility of identifying potential UI exhaustees early in their benefit period and providing them several different forms of reemployment assistance in order to facilitate their early return to work.
The assistance, not currently available to UI recipients on a regular basis, is targeted to individuals likely to exhaust their UI entitlement and to have difficulty finding new work.
Demonstration efforts in FY 1989 built upon the benchmark results of the earlier New Jersey UI Reemployment Demonstration Project which was designed to determine whether the UI system could be used to identify displaced workers early in their jobless spells and to test the impact of three alternative early intervention strategies.
The final report of that project, released in FY 1989, helped shape the follow-up projects on self-employment incentives and on the effectiveness of reemployment bonuses.
Washington Reemployment Bonus Demonstration Project The Washington Project began operation in February 1988 and enrolled the last participants in December of that year.
It was designed to examine the effect of the offer of a reemployment bonus of various amounts and the effect of different durations of eligibility for the bonus.
No additional reemployment services were offered, and only variations of the bonus provisions were tested.
The automated participant tracking system for the project tracked more than 17,500 claimants assigned to the treatment or the control groups.
More than 14,100 claimants were assigned to one of the six treatment groups and were offered a total of $7,993,500 in bonus payments.
The project operated in 21 Job Service centers throughout the State.
Longitudinal tracking of the participants continued through the end of FY 1989, with a final report scheduled for FY 1990.
Pennsylvania Reemployment Bonus Demonstration Project The project studied the effects of the offer of various levels of a reemployment bonus in combination with the offer of a voluntary job search workshop.
Claimants filing new initial claims in 12 participating local offices were randomly assigned to a control group or to one of six treatment groups.
The treatment groups varied as to the size of the bonus offer and the amount of time allowed for reemployment.
Participants were required to retain the job for four months in order to qualify for the bonus payment.
The strategy of testing the linkage of job search assistance and a reemployment bonus was based on the fact that UI recipients, particularly those who are structurally unemployed workers, often lack basic job search skills and delay their search for new employment.
The combination of job search assistance and the reemployment bonus is designed to provide both job search skills and the motivation for intensive job search, thus promoting rapid reemployment.
Washington Self-Employment Demonstration Project The Washington Self-Employment Project encourages participants to set up their own small businesses by making available to these claimants, at the beginning of their period of unemployment, all or part of the UI benefits they would otherwise receive while looking for a job.
Jobless workers are now generally ineligible for UI benefits if they attempt to establish their own business and forego searching for paid employment.
The project began pilot implementation in one local Job Service center in September 1989, with full-scale operation scheduled for February 1990.
The project provides counseling, testing, and supportive services related to starting a business, in addition to a selfemployment payment based on each participating claimant's UI entitlement.
Although several Western European countries have established such programs, the concept of promoting selfemployment through the UI system had not previously been tried in the United States.
Three-State Self-Employment Demonstration Project In accordance with provisions of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987, the Secretary of Labor entered into agreements with the States of Oregon, Minnesota, and Massachusetts to carry out additional self-employment demonstration projects.
These States were competitively selected, based on State applications submitted in response to a notice in the Federal Register.
ETA developed the three-State project design in FY 1989.
The 1987 law stipulates that the self-employment allowance payments must be made in the same amount, on the same terms, and subject to the same conditions as regular or extended unemployment compensation benefits otherwise payable to the claimant.
Therefore, the self-employment allowance payments will be made in the form of periodic payments to eligible individuals on a weekly or biweekly basis.
Claimants will also receive business development services including training workshops and seminars that focus on basic business skills, access to one-on-one technical assistance, counseling services, and a case manager.
During FY 1989, a total of 2,282 petitions were filed with the Department of Labor under the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program, an increase from the 1,019 petitions filed in the previous fiscal year.
Workers certified for TAA benefits and reemployment services during the year totaled 89,021, compared to 60,920 workers in the previous fiscal year.
The TAA program is authorized by the Trade Act of 1974.
The Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act (OTCA) of 1988, which amended the TAA provisions of the Trade Act, gave workers in the oil and gas industry with firms engaged in exploration or drilling a one-time, 90-day opportunity to apply for retroactive trade readjustment allowances (TRA).
By the November 18, 1988, deadline, approximately 1,100 petitions had been filed under this special provision.
Under the provisions of the Trade Act, workers who are determined to have been adversely affected by imports are eligible for TRA, training, and job search and relocation assistance.
The OTCA amendments made training an entitlement for the first time, and required eligible workers to have completed an approved training program, or to be enrolled in training, as a condition for receiving TRA.
In certain situations, workers may have this requirement waived.)
Preliminary reports for FY 1989 show that $125.4 million in TRA was paid to 23,677 individuals.
Comparable figures in FY 1988 were $186 million and 46,000 workers.
In addition, $62.7 million in TAA program funds were allocated to cover the costs of training and job search and relocation allowances for eligible workers.
This compares to $54.4 million in program funds that were allocated for these activities in FY 1988.
Preliminary reports also show that 15,232 workers entered training under the TAA program, 863 were provided job search assistance, and 989 received reallocation allowances in FY 1989.
The numbers of workers were 10,000, 1,200, and 1,300, respectively, in FY 1988.
Several important labor force trends, including the relationship between changing demographics and deficiencies in workplace skills, were identified in ETA-funded research in response to the Department's continued emphasis on addressing Workforce 2000 issues.
Thus, employers are being forced to give closer attention to factors associated with illiteracy and often to provide additional training and human resource development if workers are to succeed on the job.
Specific research studies were implemented in PY 1988 to identify more clearly the extent of the literacy deficiencies that exist in the workplace.
ETA also released a study on jobs and literacy that provides practical guidance to States and organizations interested in adopting coordinated statewide policies aimed at raising workforce literacy levels.
Other workforce literacy projects evaluated various training strategies to assist in the improvement of reading and math skills of current and future workers through the utilization of computer-assisted technologies.
Studies were undertaken or continued in other key employment-related areas including: industrial occupations and worker dislocation, the employment situation of black and Hispanic men, trends and options for change in low-wage jobs, exemplary practices linking job creation to economic development, and the value of various child care arrangements that have been utilized by private and public sector employers in order to improve the recruitment, retention, and productivity of skilled employees.
In PY 1988, ETA began several new evaluation projects.
Councils, an assessment of coordination of various components of JTPA and related programs at the State and local level, a study of the quality of training in JTPA Title II-A, and another of JTPA staffing and staff training at the State, SDA, and service provider levels.
ETA continued its field implementation in 15 service delivery areas of a major social experiment to measure the net impact of JTPA Title II-A programs on participants.
The sixyear study focuses on the labor market experience of JTPA participants and includes random selection as part of its experimental design.
The agency continued to fund the Job Training Quarterly Survey, which monitors JTPA program participants on an ongoing basis, and published a compendium of JTPA evaluation studies completed during the July 1986- September 1988 period.
Much of ETA's PY 1988 policy and planning activities was directly related to the agency's research findings and focused on developing legislative proposals to amend the Job Training Partnership Act, proposals that would address the urgent need to develop the skills of the most disadvantaged members of the American work force.
While recognizing the excellent record of JTPA programs, the Department decided to take stock of the first five years of experience under JTPA with the objective of identifying the basic policy issues that should be addressed in charting the future course of the Federal training program.
The hoped-for result would be service to more of the least skilled, particularly the young and disadvantaged entry level workers.
To inaugurate this effort, the Secretary of Labor appointed a 38-member advisory committee whose members had broad experience in the employment and training field and charged them with reviewing the JTPA experience and advising the Department on future directions.
ETA provided staff support to the committee and prepared a "white paper" which was published in the Federal Register.
The paper identified specific issues to be considered by the committee and formed the core of the agenda for State and regional meetings held around the country to discuss the future of the job training program.
Based on public comments on the white paper and its own extensive deliberations, the advisory committee issued in March 1989 "Working Capital: JTPA Investments for the 90's, a 36-page report which summarized the committee's review of JTPA.
The report endorsed the program's basic mission and management structure, but contained a series of recommendations for improving the quality and effectiveness of the program.
These recommendations provided the foundation for the Administration's bill to amend JTPA: the Job Training Partnership Act Amendments of 1989 which was transmitted to Congress in June 1989.
ETA staff assisted in drafting the bill and prepared associated issue papers.
The proposed legislation will improve the targeting of JTPA programs to those most in need or at-risk, enhance the quality of JTPA services, and promote coordination of human resource programs serving the disadvantaged.
It would create a national program of Youth Opportunity Unlimited (YOU) grants to target comprehensive services to youth living in high poverty areas and establish a year-round youth program of education, training, and work experience.
The Secretary of Labor testified at House and Senate hearings on the proposal, and agency staff provided policy and technical assistance to Congressional members and staff.
ETA staff also provided assistance to the Family Support Administration (FSA) of the Department of Health and Human Services in planning for the implementation of the new Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training (JOBS) program.
ETA worked with FSA on the development of regulations, an interagency training and technical assistance agreement, performance standards, and research and development efforts.
The agency developed implementation policy guidance for the new Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance Program (JTPA Title III), the trade adjustment assistance amendments contained in the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, and the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act of 1988, which requires employers with 100 or more workers to provide 60 days advance notice of a plant closing or mass layoff.
ETA officials also participated in numerous congressional oversight and legislative hearings on such subjects as employment in the year 2000, labor shortages, and the utilization of the older work force.
ETA continued monitoring JTPA, Wagner-Peyser Act (the public employment service), and Trade Act activities, utilizing a system of compliance, program, and management reviews.
For JTPA activities, the system encompassed compliance reviews which covered program management and services, administrative and financial systems, and the Summer Youth Employment and Training Program; management reviews; and implementation/status reviews of Title III national reserve projects for dislocated workers.
For Wagner-Peyser programs, the monitoring consisted of compliance reviews of Wagner-Peyser base grants, employment service cost reimbursable grants, and the financial and administrative systems of State employment security agencies.
Trade adjustment assistance programs operated under the Trade Act were monitored by means of program reviews which, among other areas, looked closely at implementation of the new TAA provisions.
This degree of oversight resulted in ETA regional office staff conducting over 380 State level and some 800 sub-State level reviews.
During FY 1989, 359.
Closeout actions remaining in pending status were those for which the contracting officer's final determination or decision had been appealed, other audit issues were unresolved, debt collection actions were ongoing, or requests were pending for establishment of indirect cost rates.
On-site program and fiscal reviews were conducted independent of program office activities on a sample of 36 national office programs.
These reviews focused on program operations and financial systems.
Issues of concern were misclassification of costs, lack of cost allocation plans, inadequate documentation for verification of participant eligibility, and failure to follow government travel regulations.
The grantees were notified of the findings and requested to take corrective action.
During FY 1989, the Special Review and Internal Control unit conducted 16 internal control reviews, surveys, and management reviews in the process of carrying out ETA's responsibilities under the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act.
In addition, a total of 914 preaward reviews were completed on potential ETA contractors or grantees, and 16 investigations, either internal or external, were conducted to determine compliance with applicable legislative and regulatory requirements.
Approximately 320 incidents of alleged fraud, abuse, or other criminal activity were reported through the ETA Incident Report system or the General Accounting Office/Office of Inspector General Hotline system during FY 1989.
Where appropriate, corrective action was initiated.
In fiscal year 1989, ETA collected approximately $19.6 million in cash and UI Trust Fund transfers for debts established through the audit resolution and closeout process.
In fiscal year 1989, the Bureau of Labor Statistics continued to produce and improve the quality of the national economic indicators and other essential statistics on employment, employment projections, unemployment, prices, compensation, working conditions, productivity, and technology.
Initiated important work to improve the household and establishment surveys, completed a survey of employers' anti-drug programs, and prepared special reports to Congress on the labor market status of older workers and Vietnam-era veterans.
Completed its biennial revision of projections of the labor force and industry and occupational employment, including three alternative projection scenarios covering the 1988-2000 period.
Launched a long-term revision process which will substantially improve International Price data, developed new service sector indexes for both the International Price and Producer Price Index programs, and accelerated the monthly release schedule for the Consumer Price Index.
Added numerous wage and compensation change series to the Employment Cost Index, continued to implement plans for a new survey of white-collar pay and benefits requested by Congress, and completed the initial phase of a comprehensive redesign of the occupational illness and injury statistical system.
Published a study of the effects of research and development on productivity growth, completed labor and multifactor measures for additional industries, updated productivity measures for foreign countries, and introduced measures of hours worked in place of hours paid.
Used its new Čollection Procedures Research Laboratory to refine data collection methods.
Employment and Unemployment Statistics As 1990 approached, the work to improve the Current Population Survey (CPS) took on special urgency.
Because the next opportunity to make significant improvements in this program will be after the decennial census, it was necessary to coordinate important planning in 1989.
To specify the duties and expectations of the three agencies in this project, a memorandum of understanding was developed among BLS, the Census Bureau, and the Office of Management and Budget.
Guided by this understanding, the Bureau made use of its new collection procedures laboratory to complete several CPs questionnaire improvement projects and to resolve many difficult measurement issues.
Às a result, the Bureau prepared two alternative questionnaires for field testing.
The achievements of and plans for the CPS redesign were the subject of a paper, "A Current Population Survey for the Twenty-First Century," presented at the Census Annual Research Conference.
The Bureau also launched an important nationwide initiative to improve the statistical basis for establishment surveys.
The Business Establishment List improvement project will generate a consistent establishment-level sampling frame for use by the entire Federal statistical system, eventually leading to a further upgrading of the timeliness, quality, and detail of data based on employer surveys.
Among the significant strides taken toward completing this long-term improvement project were the design of a standardized statistical supplement for use by cooperating State employment security agencies, formation of an implementation consultation group under the aegis of the Interstate Council of Employment Security Administrators, circulation of technical instructions, and disbursement of funding for State agencies to carry out their roles in the Business Establishment List process.
The Universe Maintenance System, the base from which the Business Establishment List is building, converted the 5 million units on its file to the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification and surveyed 1.7 million employers to validate industrial codings.
The Local Area Unemployment Statistics program completed nationwide implementation of the variable-coefficient models for estimating employment levels and unemployment rates in the 39 States (plus the District of Columbia) that cannot derive their unemployment rate directly from the Current Population Survey.
The Mass Layoff Statistics program conducted a complete review of its program, with the help of the State agencies, the Bureau's advisory councils, and the Employment and Training Administration.
The results were used to plan program modifications for implementation by the States.
A pilot study confirmed the feasibility of collecting wage data in the Occupational Employment Survey.
Bureau staff completely reprogrammed the data-capturing phase of the national, State, and local area macrodata time series systems and databases.
A special task force completed a quick-response survey of employers' anti-drug programs and submitted the results and an analytical summary to the Department of Labor.
Labor Force analysts prepared two special reports to Congress--one on the labor market status of older workers, the other on Vietnam-era veterans.
Members of the staff also worked closely with the Department of Labor Older Worker Task Force to produce two reports detailing the labor market problems of older workers.
Staff economists won the Lawrence R. Klein Award for a Monthly Labor Review article which analyzed the hypothesis of a declining middle class.
The Bureau continued its efforts to improve the quality, timeliness, and analysis of price data.
The International Price program began a 4-year revision process which will substantially improve its data.
The objectives of the revision are to make the program's sample more representative by shortening the period of resampling, to publish indexes for country or region of origin for some U.S. imports, and to publish aggregate level indexes monthly for both imports and exports.
Publication of some monthly indexes began this year.
Using sophisticated econometric techniques, the Producer Price Index program developed price indexes for the technologically complex Electronic Computer industry.
The PPI program also introduced a new seasonal adjustment methodology for petroleum products.
The Bureau initiated joint analysis of the relationships among price changes for selected series in the Consumer Price Index, Producer Price Index, and International Price programs to explain the similarities and differences in the observed price changes for the same products in different markets.
BLS released new service sector indexes for both the Producer Price Index and International Price programs.
The Employment Cost Index (ECI) added several new wage and compensation change series, including general merchandise stores in private industry and educational services and colleges and universities in both private industry and State and local governments.
The Employee Benefits Survey concluded the second phase of its white-collar pay and benefits survey expansion by reporting on benefit plan provisions in establishments employing 100 or more workers in all private nonagricultural industries.
Bureau staff also completed plans for the third phase, which will inaugurate a survey of private establishments employing fewer than 100 workers.
Activities to convert the Area Wage Survey program from 70 to 90 areas continued.
To improve the efficiency of survey operations and conserve resources, Bureau staff coordinated data collection activities for the white-collar pay survey with other wage surveys.
Work also continued on development of the Bureau's new, broad-based survey of white-collar pay and benefits to cover more occupations, nonwage cash benefits, and demographic characteristics.
The Bureau published results of a first-time survey on white-collar pay in the service-producing industries.
After evaluating some one dozen feasibility studies and fielding five pilot tests, the Bureau completed the initial phase of a redesign of the occupational injury and illness statistical system.
The redesigned system will uniformly detail, for the first time, the characteristics of injuries and illnesses and the demographics of workers involved.
In addition, the incorporation of current consensus recommendations by safety and health experts, such as those featured in the 1989 Keystone Center report, will improve survey concepts and definitions.
BLS published a comprehensive bulletin which provides nationwide results of the latest Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses.
The survey results reflect, in part, a continuing effort by the Bureau's staff to review and improve employer recordkeeping practices.
Using data from the Annual Survey and from a Supplementary Data System based on State workers' compensation records, BLS staff developed separate estimates for most States and territories.
Bureau staff also prepared a series of Monthly Labor Review articles profiling work in individual industries--such as meatpacking and longshoring--where high rates of injuries and illnesses traditionally occur.
The Bureau published a wide range of information on collective bargaining and industrial relations, including data on the size of major collective bargaining settlements, on major work stoppages, and on labor organization membership.
The Bureau also published an analysis of key bargaining situations with contract negotiations scheduled during the year and information about deferred wage changes and potential cost-of-living adjustments in major contracts.
As part of a comprehensive review of measures of employee compensation, Bureau staff developed a method to include lump-sum payments in statistics on the size of major collective bargaining settlements.
Interest in BLS productivity and costs measures continued to grow as the public became increasingly concerned with the competitiveness of the United States economy.
Productivity measures are widely regarded as significant indicators of U.S. economic progress and of the ability of domestic producers to compete abroad.
The Bureau continued to refine and extend its published measures to assist in the understanding of these economic trends.
Additional industries for which BLS published labor productivity measures were: agricultural chemicals (5 measures); carburetors, pistons, and valves; variety stores; and auto and home supply stores.
The Bureau now issues a total of 170 separate productivity measures in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communications, and service sectors of the economy.
The Bureau also made progress in measuring productivity in the Government sector, updating measures for the Federal Government to fiscal year 1988.
These measures currently include 21 years of historical data for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies, representing 69 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
In addition, BLS updated measures for several State and local government activities.
The Bureau made substantial progress in the measurement and interpretation of multifactor productivity trends, including extending through 1986 its multifactor measures for 2-digit manufacturing groups.
In addition, BLS expanded its program of multifactor productivity estimates at the individual industry level, publishing measures for footwear and tires and tubes.
A multi-year project to evaluate the impact of research and development spending on productivity change culminated in the publication of a bulletin presenting the findings of this research.
In another research effort, relying on data gathered in a specially-designed questionnaire, the Bureau introduced measures of labor input using an hours-at-work concept.
In the international area, BLS updated trends in manufacturing labor productivity and unit labor costs for 12 countries, and added Korea and Taiwan to the coverage of unit labor cost measures.
The Bureau also updated the measures of comparative levels of hourly compensation costs for production workers in 34 countries or areas and 40 manufacturing industries as well as the series on international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in 10 industrial countries.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
In response to continued public interest, the Bureau assessed the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Analysts prepared reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years for four additional American industries--electric and gas utilities, hotels and motels, retail trade, and telephone communication.
The Bureau continued to improve the quality of information on future employment trends developed for the use of education planners, Government officials, guidance counselors, and individuals planning their careers.
Analytical efforts focused on revising projections of the labor force, industry employment, and occupational employment to the year 2000.
In this work, improvements were made in the methods of estimating future entrants to the labor force by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin and in estimating changes in the occupational staffing patterns of industries.
The Bureau expanded coverage of managerial occupations and administrative support occupations, including clerical, for publication in the 1990-91 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
The Occupational Outlook Quarterly featured articles on the causes of labor shortages and labor market adjustments to occupational shortages, the pros and cons of choosing a career in nursing, and on artificial intelligence.
The periodical also included articles on job opportunities for construction managers, administrative services managers, budget analysts, and engineering, science, and data processing managers.
Using data obtained from a supplement to the Current Population Survey, a Monthly Labor Review article presented an analysis of the factors underlying differences in the patterns of tenure among occupations.
The Bureau completed transfer of its remote computing services contract to a new vendor.
All systems installed at the former site were transferred with no delay of normal production schedules.
The Bureau added new technologies to the BLS Local Area Network (LAN) to increase the reliability of components or segments of the system which support uses by critical statistical programs such as the International Price Program.
These additions enable the Bureau to make improvements to the LAN more cost effectively than if the entire LAN system had to be improved to meet the needs of specific programs.
The Bureau purchased a system that will be used to automate the production of its publications.
This system also will provide the Bureau with the capability to produce documents in the Government standard Computer-aided Acquisition and Logistic Support program format and will support electronic distribution.
The Monthly Labor Review entered its 75th year of continuous publication with design changes and special articles.
The Bureau published the 1989 edition of the Handbook of Labor Statistics, a 585-page historical compendium of major BLS statistical series.
The Bureau produced a 9-minute video show, "The Power of Numbers," for use in recruiting, orientation, and public dissemination of BLS data.
In FY 1989, OSHA made major advancements in improving worker safety and health.
OSHA finalized 6 new and significant safety and health standards, and 13 new occupational hazards were the subject of proposed standards.
One final rule, Air Contaminants, reduced and updated permissible exposure limits (PELs) for chemicals already regulated by OSHA and established PELs for more than 164 substances that were not previously regulated by OSHA.
In addition to providing increased on-the-job protection for more than 21 million workers, this rule represents a major departure from OSHA's traditional approach of individual rulemaking for each substance.
In FY 1989, OSHA also established the Office of Construction, Maritime and Health Engineering Support to provide information and support on construction, maritime and health engineering activities.
This office serves as a focal point for industry, labor and other interest groups on OSHA construction and maritime safety programs.
The office also provided engineering support for a number of enforcement activities, including investigations of the collapse of a 2,000-foot tower involving five fatalities, an explosion and fire at a major oil refinery, and a fire in a Federal office building.
OSHA also participated in the International Labor Organization (ILO) conference in Geneva on "Safety in the Use of Chemicals at Work."
The ILO is developing worldwide guidelines on classifying and labeling chemicals.
The OSHA standard on hazard communication is one of the alternatives being considered.
Because of the potential impact of labeling requirements on international trade, OSHA is working with the ILO and other member nations, notably Canada and the European Community, to retain uniformity between the classification and labeling systems.
The agency continued to provide free on-site consultation and education and training programs as well as enforcing compliance and monitoring state safety and health programs.
The OSH Act authorizes OSHA to promulgate occupational safety and health standards.
In so doing, OSHA continued efforts to produce standards that are protective, flexible, and cost-effective as well as technologically feasible.
These efforts are reflected by the standards published during the year.
In the area of safety standards, FY 1989 was the most productive year since OSHA's inception.
Four final rules and 10 proposed rules were published.
1. On September 1, 1989, OSHA published a final rule on the Control of Hazardous Energy Source (Lockout/Tagout) (29 CFR 1910.147).
This standard establishes practices and procedures necessary to disable machinery or equipment and to prevent the release of potentially hazardous energy during maintenance and servicing.
The standard requires that lockout be used for equipment that is designed with a lockout capability (except when the employer can demonstrate that the use of tags provides full employee protection).
For equipment not designed to be locked out, the employer may use tags.
This final rule applies to general industry employment under 29 CFR Part 1910.
Employment in maritime, agriculture, construction, oil and gas well drilling, the generation, transmission and distribution of electric power by utilities, and electrical work on electric conductors and equipment will be covered by a separate rule.
2. On March 6, 1989, OSHA published a final rule on Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response (29 CFR 1910.120).
This final rule replaces the existing interim final rule (promulgated December 19, 1986) required by Congress and the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986.
This rule regulates the safety and health of employees involved in clean-up operations at uncontrolled hazardous waste sites under government mandate, in certain hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal (TSD) operations conducted under the Resource, Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 as amended, and in any emergency response to incidents involving hazardous substances.
This standard provides employee protection during initial site characterization and analysis, monitoring activities, materials handling activities, training, and emergency response.
On July 28, 1989, OSHA amended the standard for Powered Platforms for Building Maintenance (29 CFR 1910.66, Subpart F) to allow the use of alternative stabilization systems.
A powered platform is a suspended, manned platform that is installed on a building and is used to maintain the building facade.
This installation consists of the working platform, means of suspension, fall arrest systems, and the requisite operation and control devices.
An earlier interim rule allowed only stabilization systems that provided continuous positive means of engagement between the platform and the building facade.
These types of systems, however, were shown to be infeasible for use on many new buildings with discontinuous vertical facades.
Now the rule allows the use of other stabilization systems that are compatible with the discontinuous vertical facades.
In addition, the amendment updates existing requirements using performance-oriented language, expands coverage to interior installations, and includes requirements for emergency planning, employee training, and personal fall protection for employees.
4. A revised final rule on Underground Construction (29 CFR 1926.800) was published on June 2, 1989.
This revision clarifies the existing standard, covers hazards not addressed previously, and reflects the current technology and methods used in underground construction.
1. On January 31, 1989, OSHA published a proposed rule on Electric Power Generation, Transmission and Distribution (29 CFR 1910.269); Electrical Protective Equipment (29 CFR 1910.137).
This proposal identified work practices to be used during the operation and maintenance of electric power generation, transmission, and distribution facilities.
The proposal includes requirements relating to confined spaces, hazardous energy control, working near energized parts, grounding for employee protection, work on underground and overhead installations, work in substations and generating plants, and other special conditions and equipment.
OSHA is proposing to apply these new requirements only to electric utilities, but is considering extending the scope of the standard to all electric power generation, transmission, and distribution installations.
Compliance with these requirements will prevent injuries to employees working on electric power systems.
Also, this proposal would revise the electrical protective equipment requirements contained in the General Industry Standards by replacing existing out-ofdate consensus standards with a set of current performance-oriented requirements.
Additionally, OSHA is proposing new requirements for the safe use and care of electrical protective equipment to complement the equipment design provisions.
These revisions will update the existing OSHA standards and will prevent accidents caused by inadequate electrical protective equipment.
2. On May 2, 1989, OSHA issued a proposed rule on Logging Operations.
This standard would revise existing standards on pulpwood logging in 29 CFR 1910.266.
This coverage is extended to provide protection to loggers in the industry who are not covered by the existing standard.
The proposed rule addresses the unique hazards found in logging operations, and supplements other general industry standards in 29 CFR Part 1910.
The proposal also requires training of employees in this labor-intensive industry.
OSHA expects that compliance with these requirements would result in a significant decrease in the number of deaths and injuries occurring in this industry.
3. On June 5, 1989, OSHA published a proposed rule on Permit Required Confined Spaces (29 CFR 1910.146).
This proposal would establish safety requirements, including a permit system for entry into those confined spaces posing special dangers.
The proposed rule introduces the term "permit required confined space" to cover the particular confined spaces that are to be regulated.
Few OSHA standards address confined space hazards in general industry, and these provide only limited protection.
OSHA has determined, based on its review of the Agency's fatality and injury data, enforcement experience and other information, that the existing standards do not adequately protect workers in confined spaces from atmospheric, mechanical, and other hazards.
The Agency has further determined that the ongoing need for monitoring, testing and communication in confined spaces requiring entry permits can be satisfied only through the implementation of a comprehensive confined space entry program.
OSHA anticipates that compliance with the provisions of this proposed standard would effectively protect employees who work in permitrequired confined spaces from injury and death.
4. On August 16, 1989, OSHA published a proposed rule covering Personal Protective Equipment for General Industry (29 CFR 1910.132 through 1910.140).
This proposal would revise portions of the general industry safety standards on personal protective equipment (PPE).
The existing PPE standards apply to all general industry places of employment and regulate the design, selection, and use of eye, face, head and foot protection.
Many of these standards are design restrictive, and/or outdated, and must be supplemented by administrative action to permit the use of more recently developed PPE that provides equivalent or better protection.
In addition, the existing standards do not always provide clear requirements for the selection and use of PPE.
OSHA would delete, where appropriate, existing specification provisions and use performance-oriented provisions to address hazards to the eyes, face, head and feet.
The agency would also update the general industry PPE standards, where appropriate, to provide clearer requirements and guidance for the selection and use of PPE.
In addition to the above proposed standards, OSHA proposed for revisions, on November 29, 1989, six Shipyard Employment Safety Standards.
The existing shipyard employment standards (29 CFR Part 1915) apply to shipbuilding, ship repairing, and shipbreaking operations.
The present standards in Part 1915, however, are not comprehensive in their coverage of shipyard hazards, and are supplemented by the general industry standards (29 CFR Part 1910), as necessary, to provide complete coverage.
2. Explosive and other dangerous atmospheres in vessels and vessel sections.
3. Fall protection.
4. Personal protective equipment.
5. Shipyard standards for scaffolds used.
6. Welding, cutting, and heating.
In addition to the success of the safety standards area, the following paragraphs summarize the equally successful health standards activity and related accomplishments made during the fiscal year.
1. On January 19, 1989, OSHA published a final standard on Air Contaminants (29 CFR 1910.1000).
This standard reduced and updated PELs for chemicals already regulated by OSHA and established PELs for more than 164 substances that were not previously regulated by OSHA.
This action represents one of the most extensive rulemakings ever undertaken by OSHA.
In the past, OSHA addressed toxic chemical regulations one at a time, but this standard established new limits for more than 376 substances in one regulatory action.
The new standard provides coverage for more than 21 million workers potentially exposed to the air contaminants.
2. OSHA promulgated its final standard on occupational exposure to lead (29 CFR 1910.1025) in November 1978; the standard was partially stayed and was the subject of several legal challenges brought by industry and labor.
On August 15, 1980, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia upheld the lead standard in most respects.
In a final action on July 11, 1989, OSHA demonstrated that compliance with the lead standard is both technologically and economically feasible for eight of the nine industries.
For the ninth industry sector, nonferrous foundries, OSHA found engineering controls are technologically feasible but economically infeasible.
OSHA now plans to determine whether engineering controls are economically feasible at some level between the current 200 ug/m³, which nonferrous foundries must achieve, and the 50 ug/m³ level set for all other industries.
1. On May 30, 1989, OSHA published a proposed rule on Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens (29 CFR 1910.1030).
The proposal is designed to protect more than five million workers against the hazards of AIDS and hepatitis B viruses and other bloodborne disease-causing viruses.
The workers covered include those in hospitals, physicians and dentists' offices, clinics, nursing homes, blood banks, law enforcement, fire and rescue, correctional facilities, research laboratories, and the funeral industry.
This proposal provides protection through the use of engineering and work practice controls, personal protective equipment, training, medical follow-up of exposure incidents, hepatitis B vaccination and other protective provisions.
This proposal represents OSHA's first rule on occupational exposure to biological hazards.
In general, OSHA prefers engineering controls over respiratory protection; however, the Agency realizes that there are instances where respiratory protection is more feasible.
This proposal includes five circumstances where respirators may be used instead of engineering controls.
They are: (l) during the time needed to install feasible engineering controls; (2) where feasible engineering controls result in only a negligible reduction in exposures; (3) during emergencies; life saving or recovery operations; and repair, shutdowns and field situations where engineering controls usually cannot be implemented; (4) for operations requiring added protection when there is a failure of normal controls; and (5) for entries into unknown atmospheres.
3. On May 12, 1989, OSHA published a proposal on 4,4'- Methylenedianiline (MDA) (29 CFR 1910.50 and 1926.60), a substance that is a potential human carcinogen and liver toxin.
The proposal represents OSHA's first successful attempt at mediated rulemaking.
It limits exposure to 10 parts of MDA per billion parts of air (10 ppb) averaged over an 8-hour day and establishes a short-term exposure limit (STEL) of 100 ppb.
The proposed rule includes an action level of 5 ppb and other requirements such as medical surveillance, exposure monitoring, hygiene facilities, engineering controls and work practices, proper respirator use, and recordkeeping.
The proposal also includes separate requirements for general industry and for construction.
In FY 1989, OSHA conducted a total of 50,416 inspections.
OSHA's Directorate of Compliance Programs coordinated 22 major enforcement cases involving significant proposed penalties that required the decision of the Assistant Secretary.
Significant enforcement actions imposed against Friction Division Products, Trenton, NJ, included proposed penalties of $2.7 million for willful violations relating to asbestos exposure and actions in U.S. courts to compel the company to immediately cease exposing employees to serious asbestos hazards.
In June 1989, the agency announced, in congressional testimony, that it was beginning a National Special Emphasis Program for the meatpacking industry.
The program will focus on ergonomic hazards such as carpal tunnel syndrome and other cumulative trauma disorders.
Ergonomic program guidelines will also be developed and distributed to all employers in the red meat industry.
Also, in FY 1990, OSHA plans to implement an inspection program in the meatpacking industry.
OSHA also reached corporate-wide settlement agreements with several large companies, i.e., Iowa Beef Products, Inc., Sara Lee, and International Paper Products, Inc., to resolve major citations and to provide for abatement of hazards in their worksites.
The agency also published a major revision of its Field Operations Manual, the primary guide for all enforcement activities, to incorporate policy, procedural and administrative changes such as the enhancement of its records-check program and computerization of construction inspection scheduling.
Additionally, a major effort to coordinate the enforcement of the agency's asbestos standard is underway, including a directive to OSHA's field staff.
Jurisdictional issues of Emergency Response, Hazardous Waste and Pesticides are being coordinated with the Environmental Protection Agency.
Draft guidance on these issues is being developed for the use of agency enforcement staff.
The Office of Construction and Maritime Compliance Assistance identified the following two Environmental Protection Agency projects that OSHA will assist.
The Leaking Underground Storage Tank Inspection and Abatement Program.
This program requires assistance from OSHA for the training of inspectors on trenching and excavation safety and hazard recognition, and on the interpretation of standards that affect these activities.
Initial contacts have been made and a formal request for assistance is expected within the first quarter of FY 1990.
Hazardous Waste Removal Assistance Project.
This project requires assistance on compliance and interpretations of standards involving construction-related activities at waste sites (i.e., scaffolding, shoring, heavy equipment, excavation hand tools, and materials-handling equipment).
The Maritime staff participated in the Joint United States and Japan International Technical Meeting on Diving in Polluted Water and reviewed the Commercial Diving Standards.
Since 1983, when President Reagan established the goal for reducing Federal workplace injuries and illnesses by 3 percent per year for 5 years, Federal agencies made considerable progress in reducing occupational injuries and illnesses in their workplaces.
Of the 15 largest agencies, OSHA found that 4 exceeded the 15-percent reduction called for in this goal.
Postal Service.
Six other agencies and departments managed to reduce their case incidence rate by a percentage less than the 15 percent.
In the 5 years for which there are figures, there were almost 45,000 fewer injury and illness cases compared with the 1982 base year level.
Éach case represented an injury or illness that did not occur, productivity that was not lost, suffering and hardship that was not experienced, and financial cost that was not expended.
By applying a model developed by the Veterans Administration, OSHA calculated that these 45,000 fewer cases represent a cost savings of over $100 million.
OSHA provided assistance to Federal agencies in the areas of training, consultation, targeting, evaluation, enforcement and incentive programs.
OSHA completed evaluations of the safety and health programs of the Department of the Interior and the Department of Housing and Urban Development and began, at the request of Senator Carl Levin, an evaluation of the Department of Defense's Chemical and Biological Research Program.
OSHA conducted approximately 1,400 inspections in Federal agencies.
More than 900 agency Federal safety and health managers, collateral duty safety and health officers, and union representatives attended the 43rd Annual Federal Safety and Health Conference in Orlando, FL, October 30 through November 1, 1988.
The conference provided a forum for presenting information and ideas to agencies in developing programs to help ensure safety and health protection for Federal employees.
The Secretary of Labor chartered three new Federal Safety and Health Councils (FSHC).
These voluntary organizations are set up to bring the safety and health personnel of local Federal agencies together to encourage communications, the sharing of expertise, and mutual assistance on matters relating to occupational safety and health.
The FSHC's chartered were Kanto Plain (Japan), Channel Islands (California), and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
In FY 1989, OSHA officials attended three meetings held by State plan officials to assist the States' continued involvement in policy initiatives and other matters of mutual interest.
Interim meetings also were held with the Board of Directors of the State plan organization.
Granting final approval to the Virginia State Plan in November 1988.
Final approval had been previously granted to South Carolina in FY 1988; to Indiana in FY 1986; to Arizona, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Tennessee, Utah, and Wyoming in FY 1985; and to Alaska, Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands in FY 1984).
Final approval reflected OSHA's judgment that in actual operation the State plan is "at least as effective" as the Federal program.
Developing a corrective action plan in response to recommendations from the Department's Office of the Inspector General (OIG) and the General Accounting Office (GAO) regarding OSHA's monitoring of State plan activities.
Both the OIG and GAO reports found the present evaluation system conceptually sound, but made a number of observations and recommendations that OSHA will use as a starting point for a comprehensive review of its State plan monitoring and evaluation system.
Coordinating with the California program in its phased resumption of private sector enforcement coverage that began on May 1, 1989, and was scheduled for completion in early FY 90.
In November 1988, California's voters passed a ballot initiative mandating the restoration of a complete State plan. This ballot initiative reversed a 1987 decision to eliminate all state funding of the California occupational safety and health program. On March 30, 1989, OSHA and California signed a Memorandum of Understanding delineating areas of concurrent enforcement responsibility until the State plan became fully operational).
Coordinating with Alaska to ensure protection of the workers cleaning up the March 24 oil spill in Alaska's Prince William Sound.
A key OSHA goal was to improve communication and coordination with employers and employees and to supplement enforcement efforts.
The Consultation Program was one way OSHA assisted employers in identifying and correcting hazards and in developing effective management systems for preventing workplace hazards.
Consultation services were provided primarily with Federal funds and at no cost to the employer.
During FY 1989, there were 7(c)(1) Cooperative Agreements in 46 states and jurisdictions.
Eight states provided consultative services under their State plans.
Targeted mainly to smaller employers in more hazardous businesses, consultation may cover all or part of the workplace, depending upon the employer's request.
The service is administered by State agencies, including universities, as designated by the Governor of each State.
The service is confidential and does not trigger a State or Federal inspection.
The service is penalty free, but employers are required to take immediate action to eliminate employee exposure to imminent dangers and to correct identified serious hazards within a reasonable time.
During FY 89, OSHA conducted more than 30,000 consultation visits.
Consultants continued to provide employers with safety and health program assistance and training upon request.
The program for "Inspection Exemption Through Consultation" continued, with 264 exemption certificates issued.
These certificates were granted to small business employers who received a comprehensive consultation hazard survey, corrected all identified hazards, and demonstrated that an effective safety and health program was in operation.
During FY 1989, the Consultation Program implemented a program-wide data management information system.
By communicating with the OSHA mainframe computer, the consultation projects transmit key information on consultation project operations.
This information is combined with the information on all consultation project operations to create a national database for consultation.
At the Salt Lake City Laboratory, the consultation projects have access to OSHA's extensive technical information database to assist them in their work and also to an electronic mailbox for sending and receiving electronic mail.
In addition, almost all consultation projects now routinely generate a semiautomated written report to the employer at the local level and are able to use the data to manage project operations based on information at the microcomputer level.
Consultants continued to support OSHA's special emphasis programs in trenching and ergonomics.
Consultants provided special assistance to employers facing potential problems with issues such as the control of bloodborne diseases and compliance with the hazard communication standard.
Assistance in developing effective safety and health management systems was emphasized in all consultation visits.
The Voluntary Protection Program (VVP) provides the opportunity for OSHA to expand its influence in workplaces beyond those targeted for enforcement.
The VPP consists of three separate programs.
The Star Program recognizes worksites that provide outstanding safety and health protection to their employees.
The Merit Program is a stepping stone to Star for worksites that are committed to providing the best worker protection and that are willing to work with OSHA as they improve their safety and health management.
The Demonstration Program is designed for situations in which Star Program requirements may not be appropriate but where the company is interested in exploring the use of the VPP.
In FY 1989, there were 12 new approvals, 10 Star and 2 Merit.
In addition, one site, which had been a participant in the Merit Program, was approved to become a member of the Star Program.
Participants in the programs continued to avoid approximately 60 percent of the average lost-workday cases for their industries.
In FY 1989, OSHA contiņued to promote the VPP.
A promotional kit, developed to assist in securing top management's interest in participation, was distributed nationwide.
Demand was so great that a second printing was ordered.
The newly developed videotape, "Partners in Safety," has aroused considerable interest in the program.
It has been successfully shown nationwide and continues to be in heavy demand.
The VPP participants formed an association to exchange safety and health information and to promote the concept of the VPP.
Their fifth annual conference was held in San Antonio in September 1989.
Representatives of companies interested in applying to the VPP attended the conference to hear about the benefits of the VPP from companies already participating.
Participants in OSHA's Region V formed a local chapter to further the goals of the organization.
They have become the second region to form such a chapter.
Because OSHA became increasingly convinced, primarily as a result of its experience with VPP and consultation activities, of the value of management systems to eliminate or control employee exposure to safety and health hazards, the Agency published final guidelines for general safety and health programs.
Also, work began on developing training course materials and "How To" pamphlets for the private sector.
The OSHA Institute conducts training programs to improve the skills and knowledge levels of persons engaged in work covered by the OSH Act and to assist employers and employees in the recognition and elimination of occupational safety and health hazards.
In FY 1989, more than 7,000 Federal and State compliance officers, State consultants, safety and health representatives from other Federal agencies, and private sector personnel attended courses offered by the OSHA Training Institute in Des Plaines, IL.
Of the 70 courses offered, 18 were conducted at sites away from the Institute where training could be enhanced by actual or simulated workplace conditions.
The Institute continued the program of offering shortened versions of regular courses designed specifically for non-compliance personnel.
Courses in this series included Respiratory Protection, Principles of Ergonomics, and Hazardous Materials.
The Office of Training and Education provided regional offices with self-study programs on selected industrial processes for newly hired compliance officers.
The programs, which consist of a text and videotape, address such processes as smelting and refining, electroplating, vapor degreasing, welding, soldering, and brazing.
In addition, OSHA field offices were given revised training materials on AIDS and other bloodborne diseases.
The Training Institute continued to support other Federal agencies through regular training courses and by participating in cooperative training efforts.
In conjunction with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), the Training Institute presented several training programs on safety and health hazard recognition to NRC resident inspectors.
During FY 1989, nearly $2 million was awarded under the New Directions grant program to 28 nonprofit organizations.
This program provides funds to nonprofit organizations to develop the staff, skills, and services to become a competent, self-sufficient center for job safety and health.
The grants support training and education projects that address serious problems in high hazard industries.
Grantees may participate in the program for up to 5 years.
Also in FY 1989, 12 organizations that received grants under the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 to research effective workplace anti-drug abuse programs and to develop model programs completed their projects.
Findings from their final reports will be summarized and submitted to Congress early in FY 1990.
During FY 1989, the OSHA Directorate of Policy and the Bureau of Labor Statistics continued work on the first major revision of the OSHA recordkeeping regulations since the establishment of the Agency.
The revision includes a planned change in the forms maintained at the workplace and new guidelines on the data required to be kept by the employer.
The OSHA Task Force on the redesign of the BLS Occupational Safety and Health Statistical Survey completed a report presenting OSHA's assessment of the BLS proposal and OSHA's own data needs with respect to the survey redesign.
In completing this report, pilot tests were performed in several states to investigate different collection techniques for the worker and case characteristic data and their costs.
In FY 1989, after 2 years of negotiations, OSHA and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to clarify the agencies'respective authorities for worker safety and health at NRC-licensed facilities.
The MOU is intended to promote interagency coordination, prevent gaps in the protection of workers, and avoid duplication of effort.
In January 1986, a worker died from exposure to hydrofluoric acid at the Sequoyah Fuels Corporation nuclear fuel facility in Oklahoma.
This accident brought national attention to the practical difficulties in identifying the boundaries between the nuclear and radiological safety issues regulated by the NRC and the industrial safety issues regulated by OSHA.
The agreement delineates each agency's general areas of responsibility and provides guidelines for staff training in hazard-recognition and for referrals of information about potential violations of each agency's standards.
Under the MOU, OSHA agreed to make every effort to participate in interagency team assessments at NRC-licensed fuels and materials facilities and has participated in four such assessments in the past year.
During FY 1989, staff from OSHA's Salt Lake City Analytical Laboratory provided assistance to State and Federal agencies in analyzing difficult sample types, i.e. diisocynanates, silica, and chromates.
Intensive training and laboratory tours were also provided for several governmental organizations and international visitors including scientists from West Germany, Canada, and the Republic of China.
In addition, OSHA's Technical Data Center (TDC) served other government agencies and the public with more than 2,500 computer searches and 2,300 docket office requests.
TDC supports activities under Sections 6 and 7 of the Act namely, standards promulgation and advisory committee recordkeeping.
At the request of Congress, the Directorate of Technical Support also established an Occupational Health Nursing Program during the year.
This program is designed to provide technical assistance on occupational health nursing to OSHA staff in program areas such as health standards development and field compliance.
Since 65 percent of the occupational health nurses are the sole health care providers at their worksites and play an integral part of the safety and health team, it is important that their role be represented in the policy-setting and regulatory process at OSHA.
Also, as a part of this program, a pilot occupational health nursing intern program began this fiscal year.
During FY 1989, OSHA also implemented a new program that evaluates, recognizes, and approves, as Nat Recognized Testing Laboratories, laboratory organization are interested in approving specific products for use in tl workplace.
Of the seven laboratories that submitted applications, three have been recognized: MET Electrica Testing Company, Inc., Dash, Straus and Goodhur, Inc., ETL Testing Laboratories, Inc.
Accomplishments by the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) during FY 1989 continued to reflect the fundamental dedication to preparing for the future while improving effectiveness of its enforcement and service delivery.
During the year, ESA's programs increased their enforcement and improved delivery of services to the public, initiated and revised regulations, and improved internal management to parallel changing workforce patterns.
In FY 1989, the Wage and Hour Division published regulations lifting the ban on the employment of homeworkers in certain restricted industries subject to a certification process; regulations on the employment of individuals with disabilities at special minimum wages; and regulations implementing the Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988.
Final regulations were also published under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts on the use of semi-skilled helpers.
However, the helper rules will not become effective until after an injunction is lifted by the court.
Section 11(d) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) authorizes the Secretary of Labor to regulate, restrict, or prohibit industrial homework as necessary to prevent evasion of the minimum wage requirements of the Act.
In the 1940s, the Department banned homework in seven industries (women's apparel, jewelry manufacturing, gloves and mittens, button and buckle manufacturing, handkerchiefs, embroideries, and knitted outerwear).
Exceptions to the ban have been permitted for individuals in certain hardship cases.
Homework has never been prohibited under the FLSA in any other industry.
On November 10, 1988, final rules were published in the Federal Register which lifted the restrictions on the employment of homeworkers in most of these industries.
The ban was retained only in the women's apparel industry (for further study) and in jewelry manufacturing operations involving safety and health hazards.
The International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union and others filed suit in January 1989 to enjoin implementation of these rules.
Under the new regulations, the Wage and Hour Division received 60 applications from employers for authority to employ homeworkers.
Of these, 41 were in the knitted outerwear industry, 5 in embroidery, 8 in gloves and mittens, 5 in jewelry, and 1 in buttons and buckles.
A total of 46 certificates have been issued and 3 denied.
The remainder are being reviewed.
In December 1988, an advance notice of proposed rulemaking was published which indicated that the Department was considering lifting the ban on homework in the women's apparel industry.
Public hearings were held in seven cities for the purpose of gathering information about the characteristics of the women's apparel industry and the kinds of enforcement mechanisms that might be appropriate to include in any new regulation for this industry.
Government contract enforcement concentrated on complaints alleging violations of the various laws that provide labor standards for employees performing government contract work.
During FY 1989, 4,903 investigations were conducted under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the Service Contract Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Back wages were found due 59,587 workers under the provisions of these laws and totaled $44.1 million.
Employers agreed to pay $35.1 million of these back wage amounts to 51,870 workers.
Additional monies are to be restored upon completion of administrative hearings or litigation action.
Under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, 12,556 prevailing wage determinations were issued during the fiscal year; 11,877 were issued for specific construction projects and 679 were general wage determinations which apply to many construction contracts in a given area.
Improvements continued in Davis-Bacon wage survey operations through increased use of automation for survey management and data computation procedures.
Internal management procedures for conducting surveys were completed and issued to staff.
The Wage and Hour Division issued 5,162 new or revised determinations of prevailing wages and fringe benefits under the Service Contract Act (SCA) for a variety of job classifications.
Wage determinations were issued for approximately 50,200 requests.
Additionally, continued expansion of the Blanket Wage Determination Pilot Test, including training of civilian agency procurement trainers resulted in 130 areas established for Blanket Wage Determinations in effect during the fiscal year.
The Service Contract Manual of Operations was published and made available to interested parties through the Government Printing Office.
Timely response to complaints continued to be the cornerstone of the Wage and Hour Division's enforcement strategy during FY 1989.
The Division conducted 74,197 compliance actions under the FLSA, of which 58,449 were initiated as a result of complaints from workers or concerned citizens.
The percentage of actions completed that were the result of complaints (78.8 percent) increased by 2 percent over the previous fiscal year.
In spite of the Division's efforts, the inventory of complaints increased from 20,377 to 21,246.
The increase was anticipated prior to the beginning of the fiscal year.
The Wage and Hour Division had projected an increase from 20,377 to 20,909 due to additional enforcement responsibilities related to the Employee Polygraph Protection Act and the Immigration Reform and Control Act requirements for Special and Replenishment Agricultural Workers (SAW/RAW).
The FLSA enforcement program disclosed $29 million due 151,000 workers as a result of minimum wage violations, and $131 million due 338,000 employees as a result of overtime violations.
Employers agreed to pay $21 million in unpaid minimum wages to 124,000 workers and $101 million to 287,000 employees due overtime pay for a total of $122 million.
The difference between the amount of back wages found due employees and the amount that employers agreed to pay reflects, for the most part, sums involved in pending litigation or the failure of certain employers to pay back wages in cases the Department deemed unsuitable for litigation.
The FLSA also permits individuals to bring private suits to collect back wages, liquidate damages, attorney's fees, and court costs.
The Department's enforcement statistics do not include the back wage amounts recovered in such private suits.
The Wage and Hour Division found 22,508 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA during fiscal 1989.
The Division assessed nearly $2.77 million in child labor civil money penalties (more than triple the FY 1983 amount) against 894 employers who were found to be illegally employing 16,790 minors.
During FY 1989, the Division issued 17,751 certificates under section 14 of the FLSA, authorizing the employment of approximately 299,109 workers at less than the minimum wage.
Full-time students and workers with disabilities employed in rehabilitation facilities accounted, respectively, for 30 percent and 66 percent of the workers employed under certificates.
On October 16, 1986, the President signed legislation which amended section 14(c) of the FLSA, pertaining to the Secretary's authority to issue certificates allowing employers to pay subminimum wages to disabled workers.
These amendments had the effect of streamlining the certification process and eliminating guaranteed wage rates specified by certificates, and requiring only commensurate wages.
In addition, the amendments establishéd a petition procedure for review of a disabled worker's wage rate by an administrative law judge.
July 20, 1988, the Department published a notice of proposed rulemaking, Regulations, 29 CFR Part 525, in the Federal Register implementing the 1986 amendments to section 14(c) of FLSA.
This notice provided for a 60-day public comment period which was subsequently reopened and extended for 15 days.
The Department completed its review of the public comments and published a final rule on August 10, 1989, effective September 11, 1989.
During the fiscal year, the first petition for a review of wages by an administrative law judge was filed by workers at the Southwest Lighthouse for the Blind, Lubbock, TX.
There were several postponements which were agreed to by representatives of the workers and the facility in an attempt to reach an agreement with respect to back wages and future compliance.
No agreement was reached before the end of the fiscal year.
During fiscal year 1989, there were 12,695 farm labor contractor and farm labor contractor employee registrants under MSPA who employed approximately 427,615 crew members.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted 4,809 MSPA compliance actions during FY 1989, which resulted in civil money penalties totaling $1,219,655 assessed against violators.
In the fiscal year, 105 actions were initiated to deny farm labor contractors and farm labor contractor employees certificates of registration.
MSPA and its implementing Regulations, 29 CFR Part 500, were amended to provide for the deletion of the provisions prohibiting illegal alien employment.
Sanctions are imposed by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) pursuant to the Immigration Reform and Control Act amendments of 1986 (IRCA).
ESA's Wage-Hour compliance officers are responsible for inspecting employment eligibility verification documents (INS Form I-9) during the course of regularly scheduled on-site compliance activities.
During FY 1989, there were 40,755 establishments in which I-9 Forms were inspected nationwide.
All inspection findings are reported by ESA to INS for that agency's determination as to compliance or noncompliance.
The administration of the H-2A program is primarily the responsibility of the United States Employment Services (USES) in the Employment and Training Administration (ETA).
The Wage and Hour Division has been delegated responsibility for the enforcement of the contractual obligations of an employer of H-2A workers to such workers and other workers engaged in corresponding employment.
Wage and Hour completed 574 compliance actions since enforcement functions began in 1987.
Agricultural Services, Regulations 29 CFR, Part 502 Employers of certain resident alien workers employed in seasonal agricultural services are required to record and report information regarding their employment.
The data reported allows for determinations to be made by the Secretaries of Labor and Agriculture as to whether additional alien workers may be admitted with legal status each year beginning in FY 1990 (through FY 1993) as replenishment agricultural workers (RAWs).
A certificate from the employer showing the number of work-days such worker was employed in seasonal agricultural services may be used by the worker to qualify for permanent residency status.
The employer requirements are prescribed by Regulations 29 CFR, Parts 502 and 503 issued pursuant to the INA as amended by IRCA.
There were 803 investigations of employers of special agricultural workers in FY 1989, which revealed compliance or agreement to comply with the law in nearly all cases.
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988 The Employee Polygraph Protection Act, which was enacted June 27, 1988, prohibits most private employers from using lie detector tests either for pre-employment screening or during the course of employment.
Federal, State and local government employers are exempted from the Act.)
The law provides several limited exemptions which permit the use of polygraph tests (but no other type of lie detector tests) under certain conditions.
The Wage and Hour Division has the responsibility of enforcing this law.
During FY 1989, Wage and Hour conducted 51 investigations under this program.
The cases involved the prohibited use of polygraph/lie detector tests.
Nearly all cases resulted in agreement to comply.
Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) continued to foster affirmative action and the elimination of discrimination from the workplace of Federal contractors, and to obtain redress for victims of discrimination.
During FY 1989, OFCCP completed 6,232 compliance reviews.
The reviewed contractors employed a total of 2,941,636 employees.
In addition, OFCCP continued to give priority to reducing the number of aged compliance reviews over one year old.
At the end of FY 1989, there were 46 such reviews.
Complaint cases in inventory at the end of the fiscal year declined from 3,208 in FY 1988 to a current inventory level of 599 in FY 1989.
OFCCP conducted 1,321 investigations of discrimination complaints.
Where contractor noncompliance was found, OFCCP entered into 2,568 conciliation agreements and 1,998 letters of commitment.
Additionally, the Solicitor of Labor filed formal administrative complaints against 41 Federal contractors.
No contractors were debarred during FY 1989.
In FY 1989, OFCCP negotiated a total of 603 agreements in which contractors committed $36,798,697 in financial outlays for lump sum or other cash payments, front pay, back pay, salary adjustments, accommodations, recruitment and training costs.
Of this total, $21,663,543 in back pay awards went to 6,634 women, minorities, persons with handicaps, and veterans.
Since 1982, OFCCP has taken positive steps toward effecting voluntary affirmative action among the contractor community.
As a result, in FY 1989, 12,588 contractors were provided with 57,623 hours of voluntary technical assistance to better enable them to comply with OFCCP regulations.
In addition, during this reporting period, 15 new liaison groups were formed.
These groups continue to explore general compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
They contribute valuable input to OFCCP on ways to improve the compliance process and address aspects of affirmative action unique to their employment situations or industries.
OFCCP, in turn, provides advice, specific technical assistance and an exchange of information.
In 2,536 instances, OFCCP arranged "linkage" agreements between employers and agencies providing worker training or referral services.
In November 1987, a task force was established to recommend means of improving coordination between the agencies.
One of its recommendations was that joint consultation procedures would be of great benefit to the agencies in improving their compliance and enforcement activities, including conciliation agreements and litigation.
During FY 1989, the Office of the Solicitor and OFCCP implemented Joint Review Committees (JRCs).
Each Regional Solicitor and Regional Director set up a JRC for their respective regions.
These Joint Review Committee meetings may also include the setting of national priorities.
During FY 1989, a number of initiatives were developed to increase program outputs and improve quality and program effectiveness.
The new Standard Compliance Review Report (SCRR) Form: The new format has been streamlined to improve the enforcement process by eliminating unnecessary and burdensome procedural steps.
The new SCRR format leads the Equal Opportunity Specialist through the compliance process, step by step, while keeping the review focused on the problem areas.
During FY 1989, major chapters of the Contract Compliance Manual were revised, then issued and implemented.
Continued development of a revised and comprehensive training program to address the needs of professional field staff for programmatic training.
The training will result in increased quality and efficiency in the compliance review process and the investigation of complaints, and computer literacy.
Delivered the New EOS Training/Orientation, one of a series of courses known as the OFCCP Academy.
Training on the new SCRR was also provided.
The second session of the first-line supervisors training was to be delivered in November.
Assessed the affirmative action and discrimination in emerging technologies.
Provided policy and guidance on corporate level selection decisions.
Fccus compliance reviews, targeting issues such as training and development; pay and performance; career tracks and affirmative action to attract persons with disabilities.
The Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) paid wage loss and medical benefits totalling over $2 billion dollars to approximately 400,000 injured workers in its Federal Employees Compensation, Black Lung, and Longshore and Harbor Workers' programs in FY 1989.
OWCP's timely service to workers was maintained and improved, with 94 percent of FECA traumatic claims adjudicated within 45 days and 95 percent of medical bills paid within 60 days; 96 percent of Black Lung initial findings issued within 180 days; and 99 percent of lost time reports processed in 14 days in Longshore.
A record 1,718 injured FECA and Longshore workers were returned to work through rehabilitation, reflecting such new initiatives as the use of nurses to visit injured employees, wider provision of services, and activity by claims examiners.
In the Federal Employees' Compensation program, despite a three percent higher incoming workload, the inventory of undecided cases was maintained at only 12,000, with only 68 cases, chiefly the more complex occupational illness cases, remaining unadjudicated more than one year.
In addition, work was restructured to place important case development actions and management of cases after adjudication in the hands of experienced senior claims examiners, upgrading the career path to the GS-12 level, and introducing conferencing to better resolve disputed issues.
OWCP completed necessary preparations to convert 42 mail room positions in the three programs from government to contract staff, carrying out an Office of Management and Budget initiative.
Improved equipment, guidance and training were introduced to bring about improved communication between FECA adjudicators and the injured employees, supervisors, and attorneys.
Automated data processing equipment was delivered to field sites, bringing FECÀ close to full conversion to a modern new system.
Meanwhile, equipment and converted software were readied which will integrate the Longshore offices into the FECA system as well.
In Black Lung, a new contract to process medical bills and provide automated data processing support was signed.
Finally, $92 million of outstanding debt was resolved in FECA and Black Lung, with collections of over $57 million returned to the Treasury through aggressive management of accounts receivable.
Office of State Liaison and Legislative Analysis The Division of Legislative Analysis (DLA) of the Office of State Liaison and Legislative Analysis (OSLLA) is the principal staff support unit in ESA concerned with Federal legislative activity.
During FY 1989 the Division examined nearly 300 Congressional bills to assess their impact on ESA-administered programs.
The Division also coordinated the preparation of ESA entries into the Regulatory Programs of the U.S. Government and the Semi-Annual Unified Agenda of Federal Regulations.
DLA also developed materials for a Departmental Task Force on child care liability issues.
During the year, DLA closely monitored bills which have expanded ESA's program responsibilities or modified statutes currently enforced by ESA.
OSLLA's Division of State Employment Standards Programs (DSEP) furnished expertise on State labor standards laws and programs that interact with ESA programs or which relate to emerging issues.
The extent of legislative activity to increase State minimum wages, often to levels above the Federal rate required continuous monitoring and updating.
This information was frequently requested for use within the Department and was regularly disseminated for the consideration of State legislatures and labor departments in their decision making.
The Division developed and provided extensive information on other State employment standards including child labor, industrial homework, family and medical leave, child care, and drug testing for use in conjunction with the consideration of proposed Federal legislation or rulemaking, or for the use of Departmental task forces or others within the Department.
DSEP provided technical advisory assistance and information on numerous labor standards subjects in response to nearly 2,000 requests from State labor departments and legislatures, management organizations, multi-State employers, organized labor, other Federal agencies, the Congress and others.
Throughout the fiscal year, the Division maintained active working relationships with State labor officials and their organizations, and participated in several regional and national conferences of State officials.
In serving as a national clearinghouse of information on State legislative developments, the Division reviewed and analyzed approximately 1,300 labor bills and new laws and prepared for publication an annual article on State trends in these areas for the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Monthly Labor Review.
The Division also continued to serve as catalyst and facilitator in the promotion and consideration of proposed ESA/State cooperative efforts and agreements involving the administration of programs which are similar at Federal and State levels.
Some of the issues dealt with included streamlining case-hearing procedures, medical cost-containment initiatives, safety incentive, and review of benefit levels.
In its role as a national clearinghouse for State workers'compensation information, the Division produced and distributed its publication State Workers'Compensation Laws and State Workers'Compensation Administration Profiles.
The Division produced an annual article on significant legislation enacted for the State workers' compensation administrators annual convention and one for the Monthly Labor Review.
The Division also produced 25 additional information articles and tables in response to requests for assistance.
In keeping current on Significant State Workers'compensation changes, the Division analyzed and prepared summaries of 233 new laws and more than 1,300 proposed bills.
During FY 1989, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) initiated or continued special emphasis programs in cooperation with the mining industry and labor to enhance the safety and health of miners.
In addition, several important measures were advanced to tighten the agency's administrative procedures for enforcing the federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977.
As part of an ongoing special emphasis program to reduce serious accidents caused by mine roof falls in underground coal mines, MSHA completed production of a series of videotapes featuring top country music performers interspersed with safety messages.
By the end of the fiscal year, copies of the training tapes had been played more than 150,000 times in miners' changing rooms at underground coal mines.
During the fiscal year, the agency devoted special attention to the problem of reducing potentially harmful coal mine dust concentrations in underground coal mines.
Exposure to excessive respirable coal dust can lead to lung disease.
Preliminary findings indicate that this focus was helping to reduce dust levels at selected mines.
A special mine ventilation study by MSHA specialists in FY 1989 pointed the way toward improving fire protection for underground coal miners.
Two of MSHA's longest standing and most successful special emphasis programs were carried out strongly in FY 1989.
They are the Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) and the Compliance Assistance Visit (CAV) program.
The PAR program targeted 31 mines needing special aid to improve training and safety efforts, and compliance assistance visits were made by inspectors to many mines at operators' requests to help them comply with regulations.
Elsewhere, the restructuring of MSHA's programs to make enforcement and cooperative miner protection programs more effective continued to move forward during FY 1989, as did the agency's efforts to ensure accountability of MSHA managers and employees for their actions.
MSHA increased its investigations of possible criminal violations of the federal mine safety and health statute in the coal industry nearly threefold, from 33 investigations in FY 1988 to 95 in FY 1989.
Also, as a result of innovative methods developed to collect delinquent civil penalties for violation of the mine act and MSHA's standards, a record high of $13.4 million in penalty amounts owed was collected in FY 1989.
The agency also continued its strong effort to audit the accident and injury reporting practices of coal and metal and nonmetal mine operators to obtain a more accurate picture of mine accident records and help MSHA analyze injury trends.
A significant number of the nation's mining operations have been audited during the past two fiscal years.
In FY 1989, the number of coal mining deaths rose to 69, the third lowest coal mining toll in history, from 55 deaths the previous year, the all-time record low for coal mine fatalities.
Ten of the total of 69 fatalities were the result of an explosion on Sept. 13, 1989, at the Pyro Mining Co.'s underground coal mine at Wheatcroft, KY.
Following the ignition, a number of MSHA safety specialists left the National Coal Mine Rescue and First Aid Contest, a competitive emergency training exercise being held in Louisville, KY, to assist at the explosion site.
At the end of the fiscal year, MSHA was completing the underground phase of its investigation into causes and circumstances of the accident and was scheduling witness interviews.
A final report is expected in FY 1990.
In metal and nonmetal mining in FY 1989, there were 50 fatalities, compared to the 49 miner deaths in 1988 that represented an all-time low annual figure.
The trend of deaths and injury rates has been downward over the past decade in both coal and metal and nonmetal mining.
Also during FY 1989, MSHA laid the groundwork for production of a training videotape for the mining industry discussing the uses of employee assistance programs (EAPs) for mine employees who have alcohol or drug abuse problems.
A survey of mining industry attitudes and practices in dealing with substance abuse issues was conducted during the fiscal year as part of a five-year effort by an MSHA-industry-labor committee formed to address problems of substance abuse in mining.
Production and distribution of the EAP training videotape was planned for FY 1990.
Previously, MSHA issued a videotape designed to create awareness of these problems.
A well-trained workforce is of paramount importance to achieving safe work practices in mining and, to this end, the agency stepped up its activities to promote accident prevention and health training for more miners.
Nearly $5 million was granted to the states and to the Navajo Nation to train nearly 135,000 miners.
More than 2 million copies of training materials were distributed to the mining community; training at MSHA's National Mine Health and Safety Academy remained at a high level; and more training programs than formerly were offered to remote areas through satellite transmission.
Major regulatory actions taken during the fiscal year include the agency's publication of a proposed new rule to identify and deal with operators of mines having persistent and serious violations of safety and health rules.
Also proposed were regulations to revise mine air quality standards.
On the FY 1990 regulatory action agenda were, among others, a proposed rule on regulation of diesel-powered equipment in underground coal mines, an underground coal ventilation rule, separate coal and non-coal rules addressing mine electrical hazards, a rule on requirements for accident reporting by mine operators, and a rule for ensuring that miners receive information on chemical hazards.
In the technical area during the year, a joint technical effort of MSHA and the federal Bureau of Mines resulted in development and testing of an emergency, oxygen-generating self-rescue device that is, unlike comparable equipment currently being used, light enough to be comfortably worn by a miner in case of an underground mine fire, explosion, or other serious accident.
During fiscal year 1989, there were 2,026 underground coal mines and 2,740 surface coal mines and facilities under jurisdiction of MSHA's Coal Mine Safety and Health Division.
The Division conducted 60,266 safety and health inspections and investigations, including 7,906 education and training activities at mine sites.
It also issued 109,723 citations and orders to coal mine operators and independent contractors working at the mines.
Citations are issued by mine inspectors for violations of health or safety rules.
MSHA supervisors held 1,509 health and safety conferences to discuss inspectors' findings.
Such conferences are held at the request of mine operators and miners'representatives.
The Coal Division's work force consisted of 1,529 employees in FY 1989.
The mine inspection work force numbered 789.
Coal mining division managers, inspectors, technical specialists, and education and training specialists operated from 10 district offices, 17 subdistrict offices, and 73 field locations throughout the country.
There were 82 MSHA health and safety training specialists stationed in district and field offices to aid mining companies in their education and training programs.
During FY 1989, plans were made to have all of the Coal Divisions's training personnel take further training to enhance their ability to carry out programs at mines and mills.
Sixty-nine coal miners died in accidents on the job during the 1989 fiscal year, compared to 55 in FY 1988.
The year-toyear rise was largely, though not entirely, due to the underground coal mine explosion that killed 10 at Pyro Mining operation in Kentucky in mid-September 1989.
The fatal incidence rate in coal mining in FY 1989 was .05 deaths per 200,000 employee work-hours, up from the rate of .04 fatalities the previous fiscal year.
The rate for all types of injuries in coal mining was 10.95 injuries per 200,000 workhours, up from 10.79 injuries in FY 1988.
The number of coal mining industry employees (excluding office workers) was 156,081 at the end of FY 1989, compared to 170,694 in FY 1988.
MSHA investigated 137 complaints of safety or healthrelated discrimination that coal miners filed with the MSHA during the fiscal year.
Ninety two investigations were opened into possible "knowing and willing" violations of coal mine safety and health regulations.
Procedures for conducting both types of investigations were improved, and employees involved in this activity given added training.
A project to develop a uniform format for preparing mine inspection reports was completed in FY 1989 and the format adopted by the agency.
Special inspection notepads were developed to improve methods of recording and documenting required elements of mandatory coal mine inspections.
Also, training in using the new system was instituted for field personnel.
On the ongoing effort to ensure the integrity and control of Coal Mine Safety and Health (CMS&H) programs, districtlevel reviews of all MSHA coal offices were conducted during the fiscal year to determine compliance with agency directives to have effective management accountability procedures in place.
Twenty-three new supervisors were graduated from the Coal Division's third annual Supervisory-Managerial Development Program.
Each year, follow-up evaluations have resulted in beneficial changes to the training program structure.
In FY 1989, the Coal Mine Safety and Health Division made important contributions, along with other MSHA offices, in developing a proposed "pattern of violations" rule that would target repeated violators of MSHA's rules, a proposed regulation to revise and improve mine air quality requirements, and a rule on emergency braking of certain underground coal mine vehicles,among other actions.
The pattern and air quality rules also would apply to non-coal mining.
A special MSHA panel, formed to review safety questions surrounding the ventilation of conveyor belt entries in underground coal mines, produced findings and recommendations pointing the way toward significant improvements in protecting underground miners from fire hazards.
The agency indicated that enforcement policies could be revised where the panel's report shows that improvements could be made.
The process under which the mining industry petitions MSHA to have safety rules modified was computerized and decentralized to the district office level in FY 1989.
Benefits of the change include more effective retrieval of information and data on pending and completed cases and better access to historical information on this subject.
During the fiscal year, CMS&H continued to give special attention to programs to reduce potentially harmful respirable coal dust levels at selected underground coal mines which had been having problems keeping coal dust concentrations at acceptable levels.
As part of this effort, a longwall coal mining dust control handbook was prepared in cooperation with the Interior Department's Bureau of Mines to provide mine operators with the latest information on longwall dust control techniques.
Five handbooks covering procedures for conducting activities related to inspections and the investigations of underground and surface coal mines were completed and distributed during FY 1989.
The handbooks, used to supplement MSHA's program policy manual, cover coal mining subject areas of health laboratories, impoundments, special investigations, and petitions for modification of health and safety rules.
Distribution of handbooks addressing electrical and general inspection and investigation procedures is planned for FY 1990.
Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health MSHA's Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health Division carried out programs to promote miner protection programs at about 400 underground mines and more than 11,000 surface mines, quarries, sand and gravel operations, and mineral mills during the 1989 fiscal year.
These operations produce a variety of mineral materials, including gold, silver, zinc, copper, iron, uranium, limestone, potash, and sand and gravel.
As of the end of FY 1989, metal and nonmetal mine inspectors operated from six districts throughout the country, six subdistrict offices, 49 field offices, and six field stations.
The sixth field station was established in Juneau, AK, becoming operational in April.
The work force of this activity totaled 530 employees, 357 of whom are mine inspectors and investigators.
Six subdistricts were scheduled to be eliminated in FY 1990 as part of a reorganization plan first put into effect in mid-1986.
Before the reorganization began, there were 12 subdistrict offices.
There were 50 fatalities at metal and nonmetal operations during FY 1989, compared to from 49 during the previous fiscal year, the record low figure.
The fatal incidence rate for FY 1989 was .02 deaths per 200,000 employee work-hours, matching the historical low rate in FY 1988.
The incidence rate for all types of non-coal mining injuries was 7.75, up from a rate of 6.82 for FY 1988.
During the fiscal year, 18,386 complete regular inspections were conducted at metal and nonmetal mines.
Enforcement personnel also conducted 288 inspections or investigations in response to complaints about hazards from miners or their representatives.
And 716 miscellaneous inspections were made for methane concentrations at gassy mines, and at hoisting and shaft-sinking operations and electrical installations.
A total of 259 accident investigations were made during the 1989 fiscal year, including investigations of all fatal accidents, compared to 260 accident investigations conducted during fiscal year 1988.
Special emphasis was given to the auditing of mine operators' and MSHA's records to make sure the mine operators comply with requirements that they accurately report accidents, injuries and employment figures to the agency, and keep proper records.
A total of 2,485 audits were conducted during the fiscal year, compared to 849 audits made during 1988.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors issued 49,457 compliance orders and citations for violations of safety and health rules during FY 1989.
This was a 10 percent increase over orders and citations issued in FY 1988.
As a result, compliance follow-up inspections to check correction of previously cited violations increased slightly in FY 1989 from the FY 1988 level.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors and training specialists carried on 238 activities to evaluate effects of mine site education and training programs.
During the 1989 fiscal year, the number of MSHA investigations of charges of discrimination brought by miners increased from 100 cases filed for investigation in FY 1988 to 123 cases in FY 1989.
Special investigations were completed on 71 alleged discrimination cases.
In FY 1989, inspectors made 1,128 compliance assistance visits (CAVs) at mine operators'requests to mines and mills that were opening for the first time, resuming operations, opening new sections or installing new equipment.
The CAV program has received wide acceptance in the industry.
No citations are issued by the agency during such visits, but notices of any non-compliance with standards and regulations are issued.
Follow-up visits are conducted by inspectors to ensure that deficiencies noted earlier have been corrected.
Inspectors and specialists also made 3,311 visits to mines and mills during the fiscal year for other types of compliance activities.
A number of technical developments took place during FY 1988 which involved the revision of metal and nonmetal safety and health rules or development of new rules.
The Division's technical specialists advised and supported personnel from the Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances and the Office of the Solicitor in these efforts.
Revised safety standards that became effective during FY 1989 included surface and underground standards for loading, hauling, and dumping, and for the use of machinery and equipment.
A new approach was taken to organize standards within the Federal Code for easier location by users by realigning the standards into hazard or task-related groups within separate subparts.
Developments in the health area in which metal and nonmetal specialists played important roles included publication of a proposed rule on mine air quality, chemical substances, and respiratory protection for miners.
These three subjects of rulemaking also would apply to coal mining.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration's (MSHA) Directorate of Technical Support provided engineering and scientific expertise to the mining industry and rendered investigations, laboratory testing and analysis, and other technical assistance to solve complex problems in areas such as mine ventilation, hazard identification, electrical systems, safe use of mine equipment, roof and ground control, and exposure of miners to toxic materials and harmful physical agents.
The Technical Support Approval and Certification Center in Triadelphia, WV, processed 2,546 mining equipment and materials safety and health approvals during the year, and the inventory of pending cases at the end of FY 1989 was 14 percent lower than it had been at the end of FY 1988.
Under the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977, MSHA must collect employment and accident-injury information from the nation's mine operators and from independent contractors working at mine sites.
These data, which are highly useful in alerting the mining community to accident trends, among other uses, are processed by computer in order to assimilate and analyze them within reasonable timeframes.
During FY 1989, nearly 124,000 accident-injury and employment forms were processed.
A major program to increase data processing efficiency was begun in January 1989 by Technical Support and is continuing in FY 1990.
Engineers from Technical Support participated in the Agency's investigation of the fatal gas explosion that occurred on September 13, 1989, at the Pyro Mining Co.'s underground coal mine at Wheatcroft, KY.
A detailed technical report was to be prepared concerning the magnitude and direction of explosive forces and probable causes and origin of the explosion.
November 10, 1988, that killed three construction workers.
MSHA's subsequent technical report on the investigation was sent to OSHA and the Department of Justice.
Technical Support personnel also investigated a fatal accident on May 6, 1989, in which a barge containing benzene exploded injuring three persons, one fatally.
The investigation was requested by the U.S. Coast Guard and was conducted jointly with the Federal Bureau of Mines, which received MSHA's investigation report.
MSHA also provided technical aid in the design and construction of seals to isolate a fire that occurred on May 17, 1989, in the Mathies Mine in southwestern Pennsylvania.
The isolation seals successfully withstood the pressure of water that was pumped behind them to extinguish the fire.
Technical Support personnel conducted 524 in-mine and field investigations during the fiscal year to evaluate toxic materials, harmful dust, excessive noise, poisonous gases, electrical hazards, explosives and hoisting problems, and a number of other problems which might affect miner safety or health.
Most of the correcting investigations resulted in recommendations for miners'hazardous conditions or environments which could lead to miners' health problems.
During the 1989 fiscal year, more than 77,500 respirable coal dust samples submitted by underground coal mine operators were processed by MSHA technicians as part of the agency's program to ensure that mine operators comply with federal dust control standards to greatly reduce the possibility of miners developing Coal Workers'Pneumoconiosis (CWP).
Advanced robotic technology has been adopted in a new centralized process of weighing mine air samples to determine concentrations of potentially harmful respirable coal dust.
The new process is more accurate and less expensive than previous hand-weighing of samples.
Besides respirable coal dust analysis, 52,400 mine atmospheric samples of various potentially hazardous airborne substances and gases were analyzed at Technical Support laboratories.
These included quartz, silica, elemental and other types of analyses.
Such analyses provide physical and chemical analytical enforcement activities, and contribute to solving health and safety problems.
MSHA's technical specialists provide extensive data about ventilation practices in conveyor belt entries of underground coal mines for an MSHA panel study on the subject.
Ventilation measurements and observations were made on 17 mine sections over 10 days to collect primary data for use in the panel's report.
The design and efficiency of Automated Temporary Roof Support Systems (ARTS) continued to improve, offering further prospects for reductions in underground coal mine deaths and injuries due to falling roof rock.
The work of Technical Support specialists with two manufacturers helped to produce refinements to ATRS systems for roof bolting machines that can be useful in low-coal mining seams.
A joint technical effort by MSHA and the Bureau of Mines gave promise of improved breathing devices that could be used by miners during future emergencies like underground explosions and fires.
Following a long period of development and laboratory evaluations, a new-emergency oxygen-generating self-rescue device began undergoing field testing in several underground mines during FY 1989.
A major advantage of the new device is that unlike existing models, it is light enough to be worn comfortably by a miner.
The advanced rescue device was approved for final testing by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH).
A final report on the new rescue device is expected during FY 1990.
Close relations among MSHA and the mine safety and health research agencies, particularly the Bureau of Mines, continued in FY 1989.
Two field investigations were made by MSHA in conjunction with the Bureau of Mines to evaluate four earmuff hearing protectors for miners who must work in noisy areas.
Meetings between the two agencies were held during the fiscal year to review and evaluate research findings and discuss new technical projects.
During the fiscal year, a total of 208 engineering design plans for impoundments to contain mine wastes were reviewed.
Also in FY 1989, MSHA's Approval and Certification Center completed 141 respirator approvals and actions to assure the quality of mine materials and equipment.
The agency's technical staff provided invaluable guidance and assistance to the agency's Office of Standards, Regulations, and Variances in developing final rules for safety approval of certain types of explosives for use in mining and approval of electric mine lamps, and for proposed regulations targeting hazards of diesel-powered equipment in underground coal mines and air quality in all types of mining, among other regulatory actions.
Principal responsibilities of MSHA's Educational Policy and Development (EPD) office include coordination of Agency policy on mine safety and health training for miners, supervision of MSHA's National Mine Health and Safety Academy at Beckley, WV, administration of MSHA's state grants program, and provision of support for voluntary safety organizations.
In FY 1989, the office evaluated the effectiveness of MSHA's district office personnel in carrying out training activities with the mining community under the Agency's training regulations.
The visits to local MSHA offices also enabled EPD to evaluate current policies for implementing miner training rules to respond to questions from training specialists or others, and assess the need for new or revised education and training rules.
During the fiscal year, 46 states took part in MSHA's state grants program which funds state mine safety activities, particularly miner training.
A total of $4,986,000 was granted to states in fiscal year 1989, and 134,324 miners were trained in state programs supported by the program and conducted in schools and other facilities in mining areas.
The MSHA-supported Holmes Safety Association, a nationwide voluntary organization, continued to expand during the 1989 fiscal year.
This organization offered management and labor an opportunity to hold safety meetings using safety materials supported by the association.
Nearly 1,100 persons and mining operations received safety awards from the Joseph A. Holmes Safety Association.
Formed in 1916 and named for the first director of the Bureau of Mines, the Joseph A. Holmes Association encourages safety by presenting awards for heroism and safety achievements.
In FY 1989, the MSHA Academy conducted a variety of courses totaling 48,990 student days for individuals and groups from mining industry, labor, MSHA, other government entities, state organizations, mining schools, and others.
Required and optional education and training courses covered many technical, scientific and task-oriented safety and health subjects.
Among other projects, the Academy produced seven instructor guide manuals, a basic computer course, 20 videotape programs, 20 slide/tape programs, and 12 printed publications.
The Academy distributed more than two million copies of training materials to the mining community, duplicated nearly 11 million impressions on safety and health technical and training subjects, circulated 947 videotapes and slide/tape programs, duplicated 1,196 videotapes, made 134 computer searches, and responded to 510 requests for graphics assistance from its own staff through use of à communications satellite and other MSHA offices.
Academy-produced interactive training programs were transmitted to mining regions, and other programs were received for use in Academy education courses.
Office of Standards, Regulations, and Variances The MSHA Office of Standards, Regulations, and Variances continued its ongoing regulatory review program during FY 1989.
Under the program, mine safety and health standards undergo comprehensive review and, when necessary, revision to clarify and update them consistent with advances in mining technology, to provide alterńate methods for industry to comply with the rules, and to reduce paperwork where possible.
A major goal is to improve protection to miners while reducing unnecessary burdens on the mining industry.
During FY 1989, MSHA proposed a new "pattern of violations" rule to identify and deal with operators of mines having persistent and serious violations of safety and health rules.
Other rules proposed in FY 1989 include those to revise mine air quality standards and to revise underground coal mine roof control standards.
Final rules published during the fiscal year.
On August 29, 1989, MSHA published the proposed rule to revise existing standards for air quality and chemical substances at coal and metal and nonmetal mines.
This proposal which the industry was asked to comment upon contains new and revised permissible exposure limits for hazardous substances at these mines.
In addition, the proposed rule contains revised requirements for monitoring exposure of miners to many substances and for respiratory protection programs.
On May 30, 1989, MSHA issued the proposed rule containing criteria for identifying mines with a "pattern of violations" of mandatory safety standards that "significantly and substantially" contribute to safety or health hazards.
Public hearings were held on November 1, 1989, and on November 8, 1989.
On November 14, 1988, the agency published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking for an overall review of existing MSHA requirements for mine operators to provide accurate reports of mine accidents, injuries, illnesses, employment, and coal production.
MSHA continued its review of recommendations for approvals of diesel-powered equipment for use in underground coal mines and development of safety and health standards for the use of diesel-powered equipment in underground coal mines.
The proposed rule on diesel regulation was to be issued early in FY 1990.
On May 5, 1989, MSHA issued a proposed rule revising the rules of practice regarding petitions by the mining industry to modify mandatory mine safety standards.
The proposal adds time frames for consideration of petitions at all stages of review.
Public hearings were held on November 1, 1989 and November 8, 1989.
On August 25, 1989, MSHA issued a notice of availability of a report of a special MSHA panel which had reviewed safety questions dealing with ventilation of underground coal mine conveyor belt entries and made recommendations addressing fire protection measures.
On March 24, 1989, MSHA issued a final rule on automatic emergency parking brakes.
This rule requires that automatic emergency parking brakes be installed on rubbertired, self-propelled, electric haulage equipment (except personnel carriers) used in underground coal mines.
On August 31, 1989, MSHA published a proposed rule asking for comments on safety standards for roof, face, and rib support.
This proposed rule would add an exception applicable to anthracite coal mines.
On December 5, 1988, MSHA published a proposed rule revising some safety standards for methane in metal and nonmetal mines.
On July 20, 1989, MSHA issued a final rule.
On November 10, 1988, MSHA published a proposed rule on the use of explosives at metal and nonmetal mines.
On April 6, 11, and 13, MSHA held public hearings on the proposed rule.
MSHA published a final rule for safety standards for explosives and blasting in underground coal mines on November 18, 1988, that were to take effect on January 17, 1989.
After further agency analysis and review of public comments, on January 13, 1989, MSHA stayed the effective date of one provision of the final rule concerning blasting more than one face in a working place.
On November 18, 1988, a final rule on requirements for approval of explosives and sheathed explosive units was issued.
MSHA issued three final rules on July 20, 1989, that included safety standards for electric mine lamps other than standard cap lamps; for automatic warning devices on mobile equipment, and on certification and qualification of persons to perform certain mine jobs.
On October 24, 1988, MSHA issued a stay of the safety standards for berms or guardrails at haulage areas in the final rule for safety standards on haulage loading, hauling, and dumping, and use of machinery and equipment at metal and nonmetal mines.
On August 23, 1989, MSHA published a proposed rule for an alternative to the requirement to provide berms or guardrails at metal and nonmetal mines.
Other regulatory topics under review during the fiscal year included underground coal and surface and underground metal and nonmetal electrical safety standards, with proposed rules for both types of mining expected to be issued for industry comment early in FY 1990; metal and nonmetal radiation standards; a standard on communication of information on hazards to miners in all types of mining; safety requirements for underground coal mine ventilation; and safety standards for mine blasting devices that fire multiple shots.
During fiscal 1989, the Office of Assessments assessed civil penalties for 156,729 violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act and of mandatory safety and health standards.
This represents a one percent increase over fiscal 1988.
Total penalties assessed were $16.4 million, a figure consistent with the previous year.
Assessments for all violations continued to be issued in a timely and accurate manner.
Mine operators requested hearings with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on 5,810 violations during fiscal 1989, an increase of 0.4 percent over FY 1988 requests.
MSHA continued its aggressive efforts to collect delinquent civil penalties for violations, primarily through addition of knowledgeable MSHA specialists to the collections staff at headquarters and key mining areas and redefining the debt collection process to emphasize both increased personal negotiation and support for litigation, where warranted.
This approach enabled the government to collect one million dollars in delinquent penalties during the 1989 fiscal year.
The agency also negotiated installment plans for mine operators unable to pay the full amounts owed.
A record high of $13.4 million in civil penalties was collected in FY 1989.
In FY 1989, the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA), the agency charged with oversight of the nation's 5.5 million private-sector pension and welfare benefit plans, saw heightened public awareness of employee benefit issues as a result of several key policy, enforcement and regulatory issues governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
In addition, the agency began to put into place a regulatory framework for carrying out new authority conferred on the agency under the Federal Employees Retirement System Act (FERSA).
The enforcement program conducted both civil and criminal investigations.
Overall, the program recovered approximately $111,268,000 for employee benefit plans nationwide.
Of this amount, $88,328,000 was achieved through voluntary compliance and $22,913,000 through litigation.
The program continued to realize good results from its "Enforcement Strategy Implementation Plan" (ESIP), which calls for direction of 50 percent of enforcement resources to specialized investigations of service providers and financial institutions which serve multiple plan clients.
A total of 525 cases were initiated against providers of dental plans, banks, major brokerage firms and insurance companies.
This resulted in $49,169,323 in assets being restored and prohibited transactions reversed for pension and welfare plans.
For the most part, these cases challenged fee arrangements, stock and other financial transactions and procedures for managing plan funds.
Uncertainty over the responsibilities of investment managers to vote proxies on shares of stock held by plans generated a review of their practices by the enforcement program.
Certain practices, including recordkeeping, voting decisions and voting guidelines were found to be inconsistent with the fiduciary requirements of ERISA.
The Department advised investment managers of the problems and warned them that proxy issues would be monitored on an ongoing basis and could be followed by appropriate action if necessary.
In a move to increase the quality, accessibility and timeliness of information about plan finances and activities, PWBA continued work in designing a new system which will allow it to electronically scrutinize data on annual financial reports filed by plans and will be used to target investigations.
PWBA, in conjunction with the Internal Revenue Service and Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, published revised Form 5500 annual reports and rules implementing the changes in reporting requirements.
The revised forms, to be filed for plan years starting in 1988, were restructured to eliminate unnecessary information items and simplify other categories of required information.
A final regulation adopting procedures for assessing civil penalties gave the agency a substantial enforcement deterrent to would-be violators of ERISA's reporting requirements.
Under that rule, the Department may assess plan administrators up to $1,000 a day for failure or refusal to file complete annual financial information.
A separate companion regulation was adopted which established procedures for appeal of contested penalties.
PWBA also adopted final rules clarifying the scope of a statutory exemption allowing plans to make loans to plan participants.
Finally, the agency continued to establish the regulatory framework for carrying out its responsibilities under FÉRSA.
Final interim rules were adopted establishing procedures for the filing and processing of applications for exemptions from the prohibited transaction restrictions of FERSA.
Also, a final regulation established procedures for allocating fiduciary responsibilities among fiduciaries of the Thrift Savings Plan, including members of the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board.
In addition, six class exemptions granted under ERISA were adopted for FERSA purposes which provided relief for certain transactions with plan fiduciaries that would otherwise be prohibited.
As a primary agency for establishing national employee benefit policy, PWBA was at the forefront of several key policy initiatives affecting private pension and welfare plans.
PWBA and the Treasury Department jointly released a policy statement clarifying the responsibilities of persons who make investment decisions for plans involved in corporate tender offers, takeovers and mergers.
The statement reiterates the position that investment decisions to tender shares of stock held by employee benefit plans must be evaluated in relation to the facts and circumstances of individual transactions.
Plan investment managers are not automatically required to tender shares.
The agency testified before Congressional committees on the impact of corporate takeovers and leveraged buy-outs involving pension assets, program enforcement actions, pension plan terminations in which surplus assets are recaptured by employer plan sponsors and retiree health benefits.
PWBA also developed departmental positions on legislative proposals in key policy areas relating to mandated health benefits.
Research centered on projects having an intrinsic value in the development of policy decisions by PWBA.
One research study was concluded during the fiscal year on pension funding under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1987.
The study examined the effect of OBRA on the calculation of pension liabilities, the amount of contributions required and the year-to-year variances in required pension contributions.
Other projects ongoing during the fiscal year included studies examining employer-provided health benefits, workers lacking health insurance coverage and "Trends in Pensions", a statistical abstract and analysis of pension coverage, funding, the role of pensions in labor and capital markets, pension assets reversions and rates of returns earned by small and large plans.
In addition to monetary recoveries, many participants were assisted in obtaining health benefits under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) and the program provided assistance to employers in administering their health plans.
A documentary television program, "The Retirement Rainbow: Will It Be There For You," was produced.
Through the use of real-life situations of individual participants, it explained the impact of career choices on retirement benefits and encouraged workers to plan for their retirement.
The program was offered to 606 television stations and 4 major networks.
An NBC affiliate aired the show and 31 stations reserved the program for future use.
Outreach assistance was provided by PWBA to the plan sponsor, employer and service-provider community through a three-pronged educational campaign to assist in completing the revised annual reporting form.
Over one million copies of a booklet and 500 copies of a companion videotape on Form 5500 requirements were produced and distributed to assist in fulfilling the new requirements.
Program staff participated in a number of conferences sponsored by industry practitioners to assist preparers in completing the new 5500 Series forms.
During fiscal year 1989, the Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) continued to emphasize a well-balanced program of enforcement of the civil and criminal provisions of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA), Section 1209 of the Postal Reorganization Act (PRA), and the standards of conduct regulations implementing Section 7120 of the Civil Service Reform Act (CSRA) and Section 1017 of the Foreign Service Act (FSA).
OLMS also emphasized compliance assistance activities designed to promote greater understanding of, and compliance with, the Acts.
OLMS criminal investigations primarily involve violations of the embezzlement provisions of section 501(c) of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA).
During FY 1989, 168 indictments and other criminal actions were returned and 149 convictions and Pre-Trial Diversion Agreements were obtained.
Both figures represent the third highest totals achieved in a fiscal year since the passage of the LMRDA.
Nearly $2 million in embezzled union funds were recovered during FY 1989 and $264,509 in fines were imposed by the courts.
In addition, OLMS conducted 372 embezzlement investigations involving all types and sizes of unions throughout the country.
At the end of FY 1989, 193 OLMS criminal cases were pending at the Department of Justice and 332 criminal investigations were pending in OLMS field offices.
In the civil enforcement area, OLMS received 157 complaints from union members alleging violations of the union officer election provisions of Title IV of the LMRDA and 20 complaints alleging violations of the trusteeship provisions of Title III.
Nine of these involved international or national unions.
Civil action was taken in 33 cases while 18 cases were settled by voluntary compliance.
During FY 1989, OLMS continued another important agency activity: conducting compliance audits of international, national and local labor unions.
Such audits are undertaken primarily to ascertain compliance with the criminal and civil provisions of the LMRDA and to provide compliance assistance to union officials.
OLMS conducts these audits using streamlined auditing approaches under its International Compliance Audit Program (I-CAP) and Compliance Audit Program (CAP).
I-CAP audits were conducted in 23 international or national labor organizations in FY 1989.
This represents the second largest number of I-CAP cases completed in any year during the program's 8-year history.
The audits initiated in fiscal year 1989 involved larger international and national labor organizations, both in terms of annual receipts and disbursements, thereby resulting in an overall decline in the number of I-CAP audits completed.
The organizations which were audited had combined annual receipts of $910 million and represent more than 1,339,406 members in 5,687 affiliated bodies.
In addition, 880 CAP audits of local unions were conducted in FY 1989 resulting in 135 fallout embezzlement cases and revealing numerous civil violations.
Most of the recordkeeping, reporting, and other civil violations discovered as a result of audits were remedied through voluntary compliance by the unions involved.
In addition, OLMS continued to place emphasis on obtaining delinquent and deficient financial reports from all international/national unions.
This will be continued during FY 1990.
OLMS received and processed over 50,000 reports filed by labor organizations, union officers and employees, employers, labor relations consultants, and surety companies as required by the LMRDA and CSRA.
OLMS also opened 155 employer, consultant, and union officer and employee reporting investigations, and closed 168 such cases during FY 1989.
OLMS field offices conducted various types of compliance assistance activities in order to promote voluntary compliance with the LMRDA and to complement OLMS civil and criminal enforcement programs.
This included seminars on the provisions of the LMRDA for a particular union affiliation or all unions within a geographical area.
Participants included union members and union officers at the international, intermediate, and local levels.
Contacts with top level international and national union officials were continued to increase dialogue, provide assistance, improve compliance, and promote increased awareness of statutory obligations.
During FY 1989, OLMS translated three publications into Spanish to promote greater understanding by the increasing number of Spanish-speaking union members of their rights under the Acts and the enforcement responsibilities of OLMS.
The translated publications are "All About OLMS," "Union Investigations Under the LMRDA," and "Reports Required Under the LMRDA."
These publications will be available in early FY 1990.
To promote greater operational efficiency and highlight agency priorities, OLMS reorganized its national and field office structure in FY 1989.
As part of the National Office reorganization, a number of reporting relationships were realigned and a new unit, the Division of Liaison, Compliance Assistance, and Training, was created.
This new Division is responsible for initiating various programs to improve relationships between OLMS and international/national unions and to secure their assistance in obtaining voluntary compliance.
In the field, three area offices were redesignated as district offices and a new district office was opened in Milwaukee, WI.
As a result, the current OLMS field structure is composed of 10 area offices, 19 district offices, and five resident offices.
During FY 1989, OLMS continued to place emphasis on training of its investigators, and it will continue to do so in FY 1990.
This will continue to be a top priority of OLMS in FY 1990.
Continued fast-paced change in labor relations policies and practices in both the U.S. and abroad spurred the Bureau of Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative Programs to create new program services and materials in FY 1989.
A new organizational structure, completed just as the fiscal year began, improved the Bureau's ability to develop and deliver these products and services.
New technical assistance programs provided practitioners with specific knowledge and skills necessary to create and maintain joint labor-management efforts in the workplace.
To expand its delivery capacity to serve a growing constituency of interested practitioners, the Bureau began to identify and train a nationwide network of service providers.
A public service print-media ad was one highlight of an active publishing year for the Bureau.
Research reports, case studies of cooperative programs, and a summary of the Third International Productivity Symposium were offered to the public.
The Bureau's newsletter, "Labor Relations Today," now reaches more than 16,000 readers.
Collective bargaining trends, strike activity, and other labor relations issues were addressed in briefing and analysis papers for the new Secretary of Labor.
The Bureau provided data on major strikes in the airline, coal, and communications industries through special reports and an expanded weekly summary of significant labor relations activities.
The Canadian-American Demonstration Project, the Bureau's major initiative emphasizing labor-management cooperation to help ease the impact of plant closings and worker dislocations, continued into its fourth year.
The Bureau continued to administer its statutory employee protections responsibilities, including certifying urban mass transit projects and continuing the airline rehire program.
Additionally, the Bureau processed appeal cases under the Redwood National Park Expansion Act, which ended in September 1989.
The Bureau's fiscal year 1989 reorganization established an office responsible for developing and managing new initiatives tailored to the needs of the Bureau's clientele.
To assure the quality and utility of developing programs, Bureau staff met with many labor-management practitioners and other subject matter experts.
In addition, the Bureau produced several briefings to preview the new programs for potential users.
Nearly 450 attendees at the "Participatory Leadership: School and the Workplace" conference learned about the potential of joint labor-management initiatives for improving operations and student achievement in public education.
Alliance of Business, and the Work in America Institute were major presenters and workshop leaders.
The Bureau also continued as an associate member of the Urban District Leadership Consortium representing some 20 large city school systems.
The consortium promotes communication about improving public education through teacher-administrator alliances.
School systems in Minneapolis, MN, and Casper, WY, helped pilot test the Bureau's new Partners in Change program.
Casper and Albuquerque, NM, school systems held Win-Win bargaining seminars.
The Bureau's Orientation to Joint Labor-Management Initiatives is being redesigned specifically for application to the education community.
To guide organizations in implementing cooperative programs the Bureau continued publishing and disseminating case studies and special reports.
An active outreach program created additional interest in and support for cooperative elements of the union-management relationship.
The Bureau's public service advertising campaign pointed to the American worker as the key to the competitiveness of American industry and business.
The bimonthly newsletter, "Labor Relations Today," carried the latest on trends in industrial and labor relations practices to an audience grown to more than 15,000 labormanagement practitioners worldwide.
Bureau reports on labor-management topics included cooperative endeavors in the airline, steel, and automobile industries, and case studies on labor-management cooperation in developing safety and health committees, forming worker adjustment programs in the face of plant closings, improving public education, and joint training in the communications industry.
Other publications included the final report of a threeyear study of the legal impediments to labor-management cooperation and a report of the Third International Productivity Symposium.
The Bureau continued to publish important research findings in the field of labor-management relations.
The series of three monographs and three case studies prepared by the Sloan School of Management, MIT, concluded in FY 1989 with case studies on Western Airlines and the Budd Company.
A study of cooperative labor-management arrangements in major layoffs and plant closings was issued, as well as Eastern Michigan University's study of cooperation at the General Motors' Hydra-Matic plant at Willow Run, MI.
A study funded last year on State government initiatives to improve labor-management relations will be on the program of the December 1989 annual meeting of the Industrial Relations Research Association (IRRA).
Columbia University's study of human resource policies and practices was published by the Bureau.
Wayne State University Press has published the papers and proceedings of the over-subscribed, Bureau-sponsored conference on the older worker in the workplace.
Three Ph.D. grants were issued in FY 1989, continuing the Bureau's grants program initiated the previous year.
Awards were made to doctoral candidates at Indiana University, the Graduate School of Commerce and Business Administration at the University of Alabama, and the Kellogg Graduate School of Management at Northwestern University.
During the year, staff participated in a seminar in Jerusalem on industrial relations in the U.S. and Israel; planning is underway for a FY 1990 joint Israeli/U.S. seminar in the United States on decentralization of bargaining.
During FY 1989, the Bureau certified nearly 800 projects under the Urban Mass Transportation Act, many of which addressed complex new issues in Section 13(c) arrangements.
Department of Transportation (DOT).
A substantial number of cases required policy decisions or determinations of protective arrangements by the Secretary.
The DOT privatization initiative continued to raise complex issues with respect to Section 13(c), which affects negotiations on employee protection matters.
Federal compensatory benefits decisions were appealed to the Bureau in eight new cases during FY 1989 under the Redwood National Park Expansion Act of 1978.
The eligibility period for protections under this program ended with the close of FY 1989.
Forty-three pension claims and 464 health and welfare claims were processed during the fiscal year.
The Rehire Program, authorized by the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978, was extended through October 23, 1989.
The program provides hiring preference for certain senior airline employees furloughed or terminated during the 10-year period following enactment of deregulation.
The Bureau's three-year project examining U.S. labor law and the future of labor-management cooperation drew to a close in June with the publication of a final report.
The report summarized the earlier publications from the "laws project" and noted that the time had come to turn the effort over to interested parties outside the Department to work for improvement.
Major portions of the final report were devoted to a review of legal impediments to labor-management cooperation in State and local government, a discussion of aspects of labor law affecting cooperation in the railroad and airline industries, and a selection of materials from the legislative history of the Labor-Management Cooperation Act of 1978.
The Bureau continued its close association with the Working Party on Industrial Relations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
Deputy Under Secretary John Stepp was elected chairman of the Working Party at its 19th session in February.
In December, the Deputy Under Secretary participated in the Joint Seminar on Labor Relations, held in Jerusalem and sponsored by the Department and Israel's Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs as part of a decade-old cooperative agreement.
In September, the Deputy Under Secretary met with officials of the Swedish Labor Ministry to develop a program of cooperative activity on work organization.
Throughout the year, Bureau officials briefed foreign visitors and U.S. Foreign Service officers on Bureau programs and industrial relations in the U.S.
The International Productivity Service, partially funded by the Bureau to collect and disseminate worldwide productivity data, continued working closely with the Japan Productivity Center, the Canadian Labour Market and Productivity Centre, and the European Association of National Productivity Centers.
The service is an outgrowth of the International Productivity Symposium cosponsored by the Bureau in 1988.
The Canadian-American Demonstration Project, the Bureau's major effort to reduce worker dislocation, entered its fourth year.
This model project, cosponsored by the Bureau and the National Governors'Association, tests the effectiveness of the Canadian Industrial Adjustment System, which provides for advance notice, rapid response, and the formation of labormanagement-neutral committees in plant closings or mass layoffs.
The General Accounting Office has evaluated the Canadian-American Demonstration Project and will issue a final report early in the next fiscal year.
Last year, Congress passed the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act (WARN) and the Economic Dislocation and Worker Assistance Act (EDWAA).
Presentations were made at ETA regional meetings in Atlanta, Dallas, New York, Seattle, and Washington, DC.
The Bureau also cosponsored State workshops on rapid response and the establishment of labor-management committees in plant closings in Alaska, Arizona, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, Tennessee, Utah, and Virginia.
The Division of Field Services inaugurated a new delivery network in FY 1989.
The network leverages the resources of more than 200 local organizations and the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, enhancing the Bureau's ability to deliver information, training materials, and technical assistance in response to the expanded public demand for Bureau services.
The delivery network complements and strengthens local resources by training new trainers in the appropriate use of materials developed by the Bureau and supported through the Bureau's technical assistance program.
Initial training in the Bureau's Orientation to Joint Labor-Management Initiatives (OJLMI) and Partners In Change (PIC) programs was conducted for over 60 local resource organizations in the delivery network, as well as for individual companies and their unions.
Through conferences and seminars, the Bureau expanded the quantity and quality of information on recent innovations available to practitioners.
Participants focused increasingly on the need for changing roles of labor and management to improve organizational effectiveness.
In initial pilot tests, practitioners have enthusiastically received the Bureau's two newest training packages.
Win-Win Bargaining exposes union-management bargaining teams to state-of-the-art techniques and principles for conducting collective bargaining in a nonadversarial environment.
Committee Effectiveness Training equips labor-management practitioners with the task and process skills required to accomplish their joint mission effectively.
In addition to continuing its function of briefing the Secretary and key Labor Department officials on significant labor relations developments, the Bureau expanded its weekly report to provide more comprehensive information on new trends and developments in labor relations, including innovative approaches.
Through its weekly report and briefing papers, the Bureau reported on negotiations in the communications, transportation, automobile, and coal mining industries.
A briefing report for the AFL-CIO's February executive council meeting was prepared.
The Bureau monitored developments in strikes by Eastern Airlines'machinists and pilots, Pittston Group coal miners, and numerous Bell companies'employees that significantly affected the labor relations climate.
While the Bell companies, except NYNEX, settled relatively quickly, both the Eastern and Pittston strikes continued as the year ended.
The Bureau also analyzed the impact of recent representation elections in the automobile industry.
The State-of-the-Art Symposium, sponsored by the Bureau in March 1989, and its summary report addressed the new roles for labor and management in new, high-commitment organizations.
Also being prepared for publication is a complete listing of the ever-expanding labor relations database, which briefly describes the labor relations policies of some 400 companies.
The Bureau continued working with the Collective Bargaining Forum, began to work with the Economic Policy Council panel on employee involvement, and launched initiatives in Total Quality Management and in health care as a collective bargaining issue, anticipating its focus in labor disputes as health care costs soar.
In the public sector, the Bureau continued to focus its efforts at the institutional level, working closely with the Association of Labor Agencies, the State and Local Government Labor-Management Committee, and other organizations.
The Bureau leveraged the significant resources of these organizations to promote labor-management cooperation in government.
In cooperation with the State and Local Government Labor-Management Committee, the Bureau sponsored a video documentary on excellence in government through labormanagement cooperation.
The video, "Working Together," features exemplary programs in a city, a county, a school district, and a state.
More than 150 public television stations across the country aired the program on Labor Day weekend.
A highlight of the 1989 fiscal year was the completion of a review of activities funded under Title IV, Part C of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) to assure maximum and efficient use of funds and human resources in serving veterans with the greatest employment and training needs.
The JTPA IV-C program was restructured in program year 1989 to increase delivery of skills training for veterans with the highest jobless rates and who experience long periods of unemployment between jobs.
A study by the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that those most likely to need JTPA IV-C services included minority, Vietnam theater, and special disabled veterans.
In program year 1989, recipients of JTPA IV-C grants were required to target their services to reach these three veteran groups, who comprise 75 percent of all veterans served by the IV-C program.
The Veterans'Employment and Training Service (VETS) completed the implementation of policies, regulations, grant provisions, and interagency agreements to carry out the requirements of the Veterans' Employment, Training, and Counseling Amendments of 1988 (Public Law 100-323).
These wide-ranging changes impacted on almost all functions of VETS.
VETS has developed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Employment and Training Administration, which administers JTPA Title IIA, which serves economically disadvantaged applicants, and JTPA Title III, which serves dislocated workers, to ensure the full participation of veterans in these programs.
A memorandum of understanding with the Office of Personnel Management will be signed in 1990.
On July 17, 1989, Secretary Elizabeth Dole and Secretary of Veterans Affairs Edward Derwinski signed a new agreement between their respective Departments.
The agreement enlarges the formal exchange of information on veterans'participation in counseling, treatment, training, rehabilitation, and employment programs on a regular basis.
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) personnel receive training at the National Veterans' Training Institute (NVTI), which is funded by VETS, in order to advise veterans about training programs administered by VETS and make appropriate referrals.
Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program specialists (DVOPs) and Local Veterans' Employment Representatives (LVERs) also receive training at NVTI on VA programs and services for veterans.
This crosstraining ensures that veterans will be able to obtain informed, professional assistance on a full range of employment and training-related services from any VA or Employment Service office in the country.
The agreement defines the roles and responsibilities of the Veterans Administration, the Department of Labor, and Employment Service personnel in career guidance and counseling, case management tracking and assistance, and monitoring of the individual veteran's participation in one or more programs to ensure their completion and placement or other followup activity.
The requirements of the Homeless Veterans Reintegration Projects (HVRP), funded by the Stewart B. McKinney Act, were revised to emphasize long-term job retention and linkages with supportive services.
HVRP projects are now operating in 17 cities, where veterans who have experienced homelessness are hired to train and assist other homeless veterans to obtain supporting services and find jobs.
The emphasis in the Veterans Reemployment Rights Program (VRR) in 1989 focused on expediting the resolution of claims.
Experience has shown that VRR litigation in the courts is expensive and takes a long time.
Quick, informal settlements at the local level are proving to be the most effective way to enforce VRR.
An accountability system was developed and new guidelines issued to ensure the timely processing of claims and negotiated out-of-court settlements.
A new operational manual was published this year and a VRR training curriculum was developed at NVTI to improve VRR services.
The Secretary's Committee on Veterans'Employment (SCOVE), established by law under Section 2010 of Chapter 41, Title 38, United States Code, meets at least quarterly for the express purpose of bringing to the the attention of the Secretary, problems and issues relating to veterans'employment.
In 1989, the Secretary's Committee on Veterans Employment issued its report from the previous year's forum.
Entitled "Workforce 2000 and America's Veterans," the report reviews the size, composition, and projected changes in the veteran population.
During fiscal year 1989, the Office of the Solicitor, which is responsible for all legal aspects of the Department's programs, represented the Department in litigation and litigation support functions before the Supreme Court, the Federal courts of appeals, district courts and administrative tribunals.
The Solicitor's Office achieved several important victories in the Supreme Court and was successful in obtaining the Court's review of other significant cases.
The Department also received favorable decisions in numerous cases before the courts of appeals.
The Solicitor's Office assisted OSHA in the continued expansion of its egregious willful policy from recordkeeping to health areas, including ergonomics, lead exposure, and hazard communication.
The OSH Division obtained favorable corporate-wide settlements, including sizable settlements with Sara Lee and Chrysler Corporation.
In addition, Civil Rights' litigation in the Harris Bank case resulted in a recovery of $14 million, the largest back pay settlement ever obtained by the Federal Government in a race or sex discrimination case.
In total, the national office received 16,474 cases and other matters, while the field offices received 14,977.
The Office provided substantial support to the Department's regulatory programs, particularly in connection with the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Mine Safety and Health Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, the Longshore and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, the Trade Act of 1974, the Federal State Unemployment Compensation Program, and the Immigration Reform and Control Act.
The Solicitor's Office also assisted Department officials and the Congress on various projects concerning important legislative matters.
During the past year, the number of black lung cases in the courts of appeals has continued to increase.
Approximately 300 appeals were filed, an increase of 50 from last year, and a number of significant decisions were issued by the courts.
We have obtained several important and favorable decisions on procedural issues this year.
In Adkins v. Director, OWCP, 878 F.2d 151 (4th Cir. 1989), and Tonelli v. Director, OWCP, 878 F.2d 1083 (8th Cir. 1989), the Fourth and Eighth Circuits upheld the Office of Workers'Compensation Programs' practice of sending a claimant one letter denying his claim on grounds of abandonment.
The courts rejected the black lung claimants'argument that the Department's regulations impose the additional requirement that a follow-up letter be sent at the expiration of the 60-day period given to respond to the original letter.
The Fourth Circuit deferred to the Secretary's construction of her regulations, observing that it would make little sense to require the Department to send two denial letters in each case.
In a related case, Jordan v. Benefits Review Board, 876 F.2d 1455 (11th Cir. 1989), the Eleventh Circuit held that the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs' denial letter provides constitutionally adequate notice to black lung claimants.
These cases are of great significance in that they foreclose the possibility that thousands of claims remain pending, and subject to the now-abrogated liberal eligibility criteria, because they were never properly denied.
On the Department's request for rehearing in Brown v. Director, OWCP, 864 F.2d 120 (11th Cir. 1989), the Eleventh Circuit withdrew an adverse decision and agreed with the Department that the 60-day time period for appealing decisions of the Benefits Review Board is jurisdictional.
Hence, the court held, it may not be extended or waived by the courts of appeals even on equitable grounds.
The court observed that the time limitation on appeals from agency decisions imparts finality into the administrative process so that an agency may conserve its resources, and those regulated by the agency may rely on agency decisions in conforming their conduct.
Confronted with a strict rule which could yield harsh results against black lung claimants who are petitioners in the courts of appeals, the court observed that "[j]urisdictional limitations and the policies which they embody must be honored even in the face of apparent injustice or an administrative agency's obvious misapplication or violation of substantive law."
The Department also litigated a number of significant cases involving coal mine operator liability issues.
In Pyro Mining Co. v. Slaton, 879 F.2d 187 (6th Cir. 1989), the Sixth Circuit held that under incorporated Longshore Act procedures and the black lung regulations, a coal mine operator has a right to a hearing before an administrative law judge where a departmental deputy commissioner enters a default judgment against it for failure to timely contest a preliminary finding of liability for black lung benefits.
The court agreed with the Department that the Benefits Review Board erred in holding the operator's remedy is a direct appeal to the Board, rather than a hearing, where the operator alleges inadequate notice of liability as a defense to the default judgment.
The court reasoned that the "constitutional right to notice would be illusory indeed if an individual were denied any means to challenge as being inadequate the notice afforded him in particular cases."
The case is significant in that it eliminates a Board-created exception to well established black lung program procedures affording litigants the opportunity for a hearing on any question of law or fact.
In Director, OWCP v. Oglebay Norton Co., 877 F.2d 1300 (6th Cir. 1989), the Sixth Circuit agreed with the Department that DOL could correct a mistaken identification of an operator which occurred during the initial processing of a black lung claim as long as the newly named operator is identified prior to a hearing on the claimant's entitlement.
It overturned a Benefits Review Board ruling which transferred liability to the debt-ridden Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, and prohibited the naming of the correct operator, where the Department made a mistake in identification during a stage of the case when employment information is often sketchy, and difficult to obtain.
Two circuits also interpreted a black lung regulation which provides that the Department may name an operator if the miner-claimant worked for the operator for a period of "not less than one year."
In Director, OWCP v. Gardner, 882 F.2d 67 (3d Cir. 1989), the Third Circuit upheld the dismissal of Elgin National Industries, an operator by whom Gardner had been employed for 357 days.
The court rejected the Department's argument that Elgin, rather than the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, should be liable for Gardner's benefits because he was employed by Elgin for twelve consecutive months between October 1969 and September 30, 1970.
The court observed that although Gardner had been "regularly employed" by Elgin, as also required by the regulation, he was not employed for "one year" as that term is used in the ordinary sense.
The court refused to defer to the Department's interpretation because one year is not defined in the regulation, but rather, only in internal documents.
Although required by the rules of deference, the court did not hold the Department's position was unreasonable.
It also failed to address regulatory language that a finding of one year is not contingent upon a finding of a specific number of days of employment in a given period.
In an unpublished decision in Director, OWCP v. Cargo.
Mining Co., Nos. 88-3531, 3578 (6th Cir. May 11, 1989), the Sixth Circuit addressed a different aspect of the regulation in an unfavorable decision.
It held that a fourteen-week period during which the miner-claimant was on strike could not be counted in calculating the one year period of employment, even though the employment relationship had not been terminated, and, in fact, continued for more than one year.
According to the Sixth Circuit, only those periods during which the employee is actually involved in the extraction or preparation of coal on a covered situs should be included in the one year calculation.
Therefore, the court rejected the Department's position that the beginning and ending dates of the employment relationship are determinative, as long as the miner works at least 125 days during that period, as required by the regulation.
The court released Cargo Mining from liability even though the miner was employed for a term of more than one year, and actually worked for the company for over 200 days during that time.
The courts also considered a series of coverage questions during the past year.
In Hanna v. Director, OWCP, 860 F.2d 88 (3d Cir. 1988), the Third Circuit held that a deckhand on sternwheelers and tugs which pushed coal barges on the river between Jones and Laughlin's mines and steel mills is covered as a miner under the Black Lung Act.
Although the coal had been processed by the time Hanna came into contact with it, the court was persuaded that because he aided in loading the coal by steadying the barges, he was engaged in covered employment.
The court found that "Hanna's participation in the removal of the coal from the tipple was a step, if only the very last step, in the preparation of the coal[,]" which, under the Act, plainly includes loading.
In Kopp v. Director, OWCP, 877 F.2d 307 (4th Cir. 1989), the Fourth Circuit agreed with the Department that a federal mine inspector is not covered by the Black Lung Act.
The apparent basis of the court's reasoning is that federal mine inspectors are covered by the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
In Amax Coal Company v. Fagg, 865 F.2d 916 (7th Cir. 1989), the Seventh Circuit, relying extensively on the Department's brief, held that a bulldozer operator who performed reclamation work for a coal company was covered under the Act as a miner because he was involved in work ancillary to the extraction of coal, as required by the Act.
In Baker v. United States Steel Corp., 867 F.2d 1297 (11th Cir. 1989), and Director, OWCP v. Consolidation Coal Co., 884 F.2d 926 (6th Cir. 1989), the Eleventh and Sixth Circuits agreed with the Department that a worker in a coal company's central machine repair shop located within a mile from an extraction site is covered by the Black Lung Act.
The courts consequently imposed liability for benefits on the coal mine operators, rather than on the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, on the basis of this employment.
Both courts reasoned that the machine shop is a covered situs because it was situated "around" a coal mine, as required by the Act.
In so holding, the courts rejected the inflexible geographical, or fixed distance rule, and the rule requiring frequent contact with the actual extraction site, to which the Benefits Review Board and one circuit adhere, in favor of the functional approach advocated by the Department.
The Sixth Circuit observed that repair facilities are typically located in close proximity to extraction sites because it is economically efficient for the mine operator to be able to repair equipment as quickly as possible, but that mining operations are "inherently peripatetic."
The court emphasized that it would be "grossly unfair" to allow an operator to escape liability for occupational illnesses arising from employment in these facilities simply because they are not located directly adjacent to an extraction site.
The courts of appeals have also decided a number of significant entitlement questions during the fiscal year.
In the aftermath of the Supreme Court's decision in Pittston Coal Group v. Sebben, 109 S. Ct. 414 (1988), the Sixth Circuit considered an issue related to the Supreme Court's decision that the Department's interim entitlement criteria impermissibly restrict access to a presumption of total disability due to pneumoconiosis.
In Youghiogheny & Ohio Coal Company v. Milliken, 866 F.2d 195 (6th Cir. 1989), the court agreed with the Department that, in contrast to the regulatory invocation criteria, the Department's rebuttal criteria were not impermissibly restrictive.
The court ruled, on the basis of its prior case law and the Act's directive that all relevant evidence be considered, that all four rebuttal methods outlined in the DOL interim regulation were available to the party opposing entitlement even though the old HEW regulation at issue in Sebben provided for only two methods of rebuttal.
Finally, in Mangus v. Director, OWCP, 882 F.2d 1527 (10th Cir. 1989), the Tenth Circuit considered that portion of the Department's permanent regulations which addresses the degree of causation a claimant must prove between pneumoconiosis and total disability in order to be entitled to benefits.
It held that under the Part 718 regulations, if pneumoconiosis is at least a contributing cause of a totally disabling respiratory impairment, a claimant has satisfied the burden of proof.
The court rejected the Department's interpretation, which requires a black lung claimant to show that pneumoconiosis is a substantially contributing cause of the disability.
Although not addressing the specific quantum of evidence necessary to meet the burden of proof, the Sixth Circuit held in Zimmerman v. Director, OWCP, 871 F.2d 564 (6th Cir. 1989), that a claimant must show that the total disability is due to pneumoconiosis; the court recognized that mere proof of a totally disabling respiratory impairment, absent a showing that it is due to pneumoconiosis, is insufficient.
The Department continued to participate actively in litigation before the Benefits Review Board during the past fiscal year, filing over 1,300 briefs, motions, or other substantive pleadings and participating in the oral arguments scheduled by the Board.
The Board issued several noteworthy decisions during the year.
In Pendley v. Director, OWCP, Black Lung Rep. (MB) BRB No. 86-2279 BLA (Ben. Rev. Bd. August 28, 1989), the Board overruled five earlier decisions holding that it possessed jurisdiction to review an administrative law judge's decision denying benefits notwithstanding that the claimant and the liable Trust Fund agree that the decision is erroneous and an award of benefits is appropriate.
On the motion of the Director, the Board will now remand such cases to the deputy commissioner for payment of benefits without reviewing the merits of the administrative law judge's decision; the parties' agreement that the claimant is entitled to benefits moots any controversy in the case and, consequently, divests the Board of jurisdiction over the claim.
Previously, the Board required appeals in cases arising outside the Third Circuit to be filed within 30 days after the administrative law judge's decision was issued.
The Board indicated that fairness and judicial efficiency require a uniform nationwide rule for fixing appeal deadlines.
In Smith v. Camco Mining Inc., Black Lung Rep. (MB) , BRB No. 87-723 BLA (Ben. Rev. Bd. July 27, 1989), the Board interpreted section 422(l) of the Act, 30 U.S.C. 932(1), which provides that "no ... eligible survivors of a miner who was determined eligible to receive benefits at the time of his or her death [shall] be required to file a new claim for benefits or otherwise refile or revalidate the claim of such miner..."
Under this provision, the survivor of a miner who filed a claim before 1982 is not required to refile and reestablish entitlement after the miner dies.
At issue was the necessity for a survivor to file her own claim if the miner's claim was provisionally approved at his death but subsequently denied, precluding an automatic award to the survivor.
The Board concluded that section 422(a) relieves any such survivor of the necessity of filing a separate application to pursue benefits in her own right based on the miner's death due to pneumoconiosis; the affeçted survivor's claim must be adjudicated pursuant to the regulations and statutory presumptions in effect at the time the miner's claim was filed.
Finally, in Borgeson v. Kaiser Steel Corp., 12 Black Lung Rep. 1-160 (MB) (Ben Rev. Bd. 1989), the Board overruled its longstanding holding that rebuttal of the interim presumption of entitlement under 20 CFR 727.203(b)(3) only requires evidence negating a significant relationship between the miner's total disability and his coal mine employment.
The Board held that the plain language of section 727.203(b)(3) requires the party opposing entitlement to rule out any causal relationship between the miner's total disability and his coal mine employment.
The Board's decision is consistent with the regulatory interpretation adopted by five circuit courts of appeals.
During fiscal year 1989, the Division of Civil Rights participated in litigation, training activities, regulatory work, and the development of legal opinions involving issues arising under Executive Order 11246, as amended; sections 503 and 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended; the affirmative action provisions of the Vietnam Era Veterans'Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, as amended, 38 U.S.C. 2012 (VEVRA); Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended; and the nondiscrimination provisions of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), its predecessor, the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA), and other federal grant statutes.
Enforcement activity on behalf of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) constituted the major part of the Division's litigation during the fiscal year.
The Division filed a number of new enforcement actions with the Office of Administrative Law Judges (OALJ) under Executive Order 11246 and section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act.
Additional cases, previously filed, were successfully resolved, while work continued in other litigation.
Finally, the year saw an increase in enforcement referrals from OFCCP to the Regional Solicitors' offices.
The Division gave considerable attention to coordinating the regional office litigation, training the regional office staff and handling the administrative appeals arising out of the regional trial litigation.
During the fiscal year, the Division filed four Executive Order sex discrimination cases: OFCCP v. Woodward Governor, No. 89-OFC-12; OFCCP v. Kansas City Power & Light (KCP&L), No. 89-OFC-28; OFCCP v. Kaiser Aerotech, No. 89-OFC-19; and OFCCP v. Roberts Dairy, No. 89-OFC-38.
In KCP&L, a consent decree resolving the discrimination claims was filed along with the complaint.
Under the terms of the decree, KCP&L provided back pay and seniority relief to six women.
Woodward Governor, Kaiser Aerotech, and Roberts Dairy are in pretrial discovery.
The Division filed section 503 complaints in three cases during the fiscal year.
The case was resolved by consent decree.
Two other section 503 complaints were filed this year: OFCCP v. Siemens Transmission, No. 89-OFC-11 (class case involving various medical disabilities including back problems, respiratory conditions and epilepsy) and OFCCP v. ConAgra Poultry, No. 89-OFC-15 (hysterectomy).
Siemens was resolved by consent decree providing for $330,000 in back pay for individuals and retroactive pension contributions.
ConAgra is in pretrial discovery.
Several other cases, which had been filed in previous years, were resolved by consent decree in FY 1989.
In OFCCP v. Harris Trust & Savings Bank, No. 78-OFCCP-2, a race and sex discrimination case brought under Executive Order 11246, the decree provided for $14 million in back pay and other remedies to approximately 9,000 victims of discrimination.
The settlement is the largest ever obtained by the government in a race or sex discrimination case.
In OFCCP v. Electronic Data Systems, Inc., No. 87-OFC-3, a case brought under Executive Order 11246 involving coverage of interrelated corporate affiliates, the company agreed in the decree to allow OFCCP to conduct compliance reviews of the parent corporation and of subsidiaries that have Federal contracts.
Consent decrees were also obtained in two section 503 cases.
In OFCCP v. GTE, Lenkurt, No. 87-OFC-15, the consent decree provided for $18,000 in back pay for the complainant, who was not interested in reinstatement.
In OFCCP v. M-K-T Railroad, No. 88-OFC-13, a partial consent decree was entered which provided for back pay, reinstatement and retroactive seniority for one complainant.
Pretrial discovery is continuing with regard to a second complainant.
The Division also received three favorable final agency decisions during the fiscl year.
In OFCCP v. PPG Industries, No. 86-OFC-9, the Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards held that PPG had violated section 503 by failing to hire a qualified handicapped individual for an entry level laborer position because of his epilepsy.
Secretary held that the complainant, who had high blood pressure, was a qualified handicapped individual, and that WMATA had discriminated against him by failing to hire him because of his blood pressure.
In OFCCP v. University of North Carolina, No. 84-OFC-20, the Secretary held that the entire university system was covered by Executive Order 11246, section 503 and VÉVRA by virtue of Government contracts held by three of UNC's campuses.
Pretrial discovery continued in several significant cases under Executive Order 11246: OFCCP v. Precision Castparts, No. 87-OFC-10 (pattern and practice of sex discrimination); OFCCP v. USAA Federal Savings Bank, No. 87-OFC-27 (contractor challenge to coverage based upon Federal deposit and share insurance); and OFCCP v. Piedmont Aviation, No. 88- OFC-17 (pattern and practice of race discrimination).
During the fiscal year, the Division also filed exceptions and responses to exceptions to ALJ Recommended Decisions in several section 503 cases.
In OFCCP v. Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority,(WMATA), No. 86-OFC-8, the Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards had remanded the case to the ALJ for a hearing to determine the amount of monetary relief owed to the complainant by WMATA due to its discrimination.
The Division filed responses to WMATA's exceptions to several of the ALJ's holdings regarding the standards to be utilized in calculating backpay, and the duty of a victim of discrimination to mitigate damages.
In OFCCP v. Yellow Freight, No. 79-OFCCP-7, the ALJ held that Yellow Freight violated section 503 by rejecting applicants solely on the basis of back x-rays, but that only two of the four complainants were entitled to full relief.
The Division filed exceptions arguing that the ALJ applied an incorrect legal standard and that he erred in holding that potential workers'compensation liability establishes a business necessity defense.
In OFCCP v. Jacobi- Lewis, No. 88-OFC-18, a section 503 case, the ALJ recommended an award to the defendant under the Equal Access to Justice Act (EAJA).
The Division filed exceptions arguing that EAJA is not applicable to cases under section 503 (except in limited circumstances not applicable to that case).
In OFCCP v. Cissell Manufacturing Co., No. 87-OFC-26, the Division filed exceptions to the ALJ's grant of summary judgment to the company based upon his holding that the complainant's knee impairment did not constitute a handicap for purposes of section 503.
In OFCCP v. United Parcel Service, Inc., No. 87-OFC-17, the ALJ dismissed the case based upon his holding that the complainant, a qualified handicapped individual, was not discriminated against, because she was fired because UPS believed she had committed a dishonest act, and not because of her handicap.
The Division filed extensive exceptions to the Recommended Decision and responses to the company's exceptions.
In OFCCP v. Norfolk & Western Railway Company, No. 80-OFCCP-14, the ALJ issued a Recommended Decision and Order on Remand holding that the complainant was discharged in violation of section 503 and VEVRA, and ordered the company to provide back wages to the complainant.
Although we received a favorable ruling, the Division filed exceptions to the evidentiary standard applied by the ALJ and to his holding that reinstatement, front pay and debarment are either not authorized by section 503 and VEVRA or not warranted by the facts of the case.
In OFCCP v. Norfolk & Western Railway Company, No. 88-OFC-4, the ALJ dismissed the case, holding that the company had proven that its job qualifications excluding an obese and hypertensive applicant were job-related and consistent with business necessity and the safe performance of the job.
The Division filed exceptions to the ALJ's holdings that the company met its burden of proof and that, had discrimination been found, the complainant would not have been entitled to back pay.
The Division also filed exceptions in OFCCP v. Jacksonville Shipyards, Inc., No. 89-OFC-1, a race and sex discrimination pattern and practice case filed under Executive Order 11246.
During pretrial discovery, the ALJ ordered OFCCP to produce certain interview statements which had been taken by OFCCP's investigators during the course of the investigation.
OFCCP declined to disclose the names of the persons interviewed based upon the Government's informer's privilege.
The ALJ dismissed the case as a sanction for the refusal to comply with his order.
The Division excepted to his ruling that the names of the informers should be turned over to the company in spite of the privilege and to two other procedural rulings made during the pretrial discovery stage of the litigation.
During the fiscal year, the Division continued to prevail against court challenges to OFCCP's activities.
In Smith & Wesson v. Department of Labor, No. 85-0427-F (D. Mass. February 21, 1989), the company sought to enjoin a section 503 complaint investigation.
The court dismissed the action, holding that the company had failed to exhaust its administrative remedies.
In Kaiser Aerotech v. Local 76 et al, No.
C89-1331 (N.D. Cal.), the company sought a declaratory judgment to resolve a purported conflict between the requirements of a conciliation agreement between the company and OFCCP and a collective bargaining agreement.
The matter was resolved with a voluntary dismissal.
In Gibson v. U.S. Department of Labor, No. 1:89CV0849 (N.D. Ohio), the court dismissed a challenge to OFCCP's investigatory findings under the Executive Order of no discrimination by plaintiff's former employer, and in Chasse v. U.S. Department of Labor, No.
H-83-474 (D. Conn.), the court dismissed plaintiff's challenge to OFCCP's closing of her section 503 compliant as untimely on the grounds that there is no judicial review of section 503 nonenforcement decisions.
In PPG Industries v. United States of America, et al., No. 89-0757 (D.D.C.), the Division is assisting the U.S. Attorney in the defense of the Assistant Secretary's decision in OFCCP v. PPG Industries, No. 86-OFC-9.
PPG has alleged that the burden of proof applied by the Assistant Secretary was incorrect as a matter of law and that OFCCP's regulation regarding coverage is void because it is beyond the scope of section 503.
In Dorsey v. United States Department of Labor, et al., No. 88-1898 (TFH) (D.D.C.), and Doe v. Office of Job Corps, et al., No. 89-0736-MC (D. Mass.), the Division is assisting the Department of Justice in the defense of the Job Corps' former AIDS screening policy.
The plaintiffs in both cases have alleged that the Job Corps' former screening policy, which excluded residential program corpsmembers who tested positive for the AIDS virus, violates section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, the First, Fourth, Fifth and Ninth Amendments to the Constitution, and the Administrative Procedure Act.
In Stouffer Foods Corporation v. Dole, No. 7:89-2149-3 (D.S.C.), the Division is assisting the Department of Justice in defending against the company's broad-based challenge to the Executive Order and section 503.
Atlanta RSOL filed an administrative complaint against Stouffer (No. 89-OFC-33) alleging a pattern and practice of race discrimination and several individual violations of section 503.
Stouffer has alleged that the Executive Order is unconstitutional and that both the Order and section 503 violate the Contract Disputes Act.
During fiscal year 1989, litigation continued on behalf of the Directorate of Civil Rights (DCR) in DCR v. Clearfield Job Corps Center(CJCC) and Management Training Corporation, No. 88-JTP-7.
CJCC is the first pattern and practice discrimination case brought under JTPA.
During the fiscal year a partial consent decree was entered resolving two individual claims of discrimination as well as DCR's allegations that CJCC had discriminated in terminations of minority corpsmembers.
The remaining aspects of the case are still in discovery.
OFCCP v. Cleveland Electric Illuminating, No. 89-OFC-13 (Cleveland RSOL), is a pattern and practice race discrimination case brought under Executive Order 11246.
At the end of the fiscal year the case was in pretrial discovery.
In OFCCP v. ASARCO Inc., No. 89-OFC-18 (Nashville RSOL), a complaint was filed alleging that ASARCO had violated section 503 by failing to hire five qualified handicapped applicants for employment because of various handicaps.
At the end of the fiscal year the case is in pretrial discovery.
During the fiscal year, trials were concluded in OFCCP v. Lawrence Aviation Industries, Inc., No. 87-OFC-11 (New York RSOL), a pattern and practice sex discrimination case under Executive Order 11246; and OFCCP v. Louisville Gas and Electric Co., No. 88-OFC-12 (Nashville RSOL), a section 503 case alleging failure to hire a qualified handicapped individual based upon scoliosis of the spine.
During the fiscal year, the Division also continued its very active opinion and advice support of Departmental activities.
Assistance was provided primarily to two agencies, OFCCP and DCR, but also was provided to other organizations throughout the Department such as the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy (OASP), the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM), the United States Employment Service (USES), and the Office of Job Corps.
The Division worked closely with OFCCP on several major initiatives designed to improve the quality of its compliance investigations and the skills and preparedness of its investigatory staff.
For instance, the Division provided extensive guidance to OFCCP concerning the agency's revision of its compliance manual, thoroughly reviewing and critiquing the various drafts of each chapter.
The manual sets forth OFCCP's policies and procedures for the conduct of compliance reviews and complaint investigations, and serves as the day-to-day guidebook for agency field staff.
During the fiscal year, OFCCP issued five chapters of the revised manual, and work on several more chapters was in progress at the close of the year.
The Division also worked closely with OFCCP in the preparation and presentation of a two-week-long training course for new equal opportunity specialists.
Division staff fully reviewed the course materials and curriculum.
In addition, senior staff from the Division made presentations to the trainees on theories of employment discrimination and on the relationship between OFCCP and SOL in the investigation and enforcement of a case.
The fiscal year saw the culmination of two longstanding projects concerning the nationwide AIDS epidemic.
OFCCP issued to its staff a detailed policy directive on the processing of complaints alleging handicap discrimination due to AIDS or related conditions.
The directive, which was researched and drafted by Division staff, represented the first guidance provided by OFCCP on the subject.
Also, Job Corps issued its revised policy addressing the screening of incoming students for exposure to the AIDS virus and the further processing of students who test positive.
Consistent with the Division's advice, Job Corps adopted physical and psychosocial protocols for determining whether seropositive students would be able successfully to participate in the Job Corps residential program.
Another very active area for the Division was participation in the nationwide effort to curtail the use of illegal drugs.
The Division worked closely with OASAM to ensure the consistency of DOL's Drug-Free Workplace Plan with rapidly evolving legal standards.
In addition, the Division assisted OASP with review of the Administration's National Drug Control Strategy, which was presented to Congress in early September.
The Division also had active involvement in several significant legislative projects.
Chief among these was the Americans With Disabilities Act, a potentially landmark civil rights law for individuals with disabilities that is supported by the Administration.
The Division advised OASP on the provisions of the bill, ręviewed Administration-proposed alternatives, and tracked the progress of the legislation through the Congress.
Additionally, the Division worked closely with ESA in reviewing and critiquing H.R. 2235, a bill that would codify most of Executive Order 11246 and have other direct impacts on OFCCP.
The Division continued its legal support of several ongoing Departmental projects.
In May, USES received a comprehensive report from the National Academy of Sciences on fairness in employment testing (particularly relating to the General Aptitude Test Battery, or GATB); an attorney from the Division is working with an ETA task force charged with analyzing the report and proposing options for further Departmental action.
Work also proceeded on DCR's comprehensive regulation addressing nondiscrimination in programs and activities funded by DOL.
The draft regulation was forwarded to the Justice Department and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission for review, and a redraft in response to comments received has been prepared.
The Division also continued to provide significant legal opinion and advice support for the day-to-day operations of its client agencies.
For instance, it advised OFCCP on the agency's desired termination of National Reporting System agreements with several large contractors, reviewed for legal sufficiency and prepared comments on many new OFCCP policy directives, and prepared legal opinions on a wide range of novel handicap discrimination issues.
Finally, the Division participated intensively in a joint OFCCP-SOL Task Force on Nontraditional Jobs for Women.
The Task Force is examining barriers to equal employment opportunity in skilled craft and technical jobs in the aerospace and construction industries.
During the fiscal year, Task Force members reviewed closed compliance review files and other materials, and participated in a series of compliance reviews.
Workers' Compensation Act and the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA).
In addition, the Division was responsible for representing the OWCP in all suits filed against it involving the Longshore Act, the FECA, and the Black Lung Benefits Act, and for processing claims filed with the Department of Labor under the Federal Tort Claims Act.
The Division processed in excess of 9,600 administrative claims involving asbestos-related diseases that were filed with the Department under the Federal Tort Claims Act.
During the same period, the Division recovered more than $1.8 million for the Employees'Compensation Fund as a result of settlements reached in third-party tort actions filed by injured federal workers; these settlements also permitted the Fund to establish a credit against future compensation liability in the amount of more than $4.9 million.
The amounts obtained as refunds and as a credit against future liability more than doubled last year's amounts.
Additional significant amounts were recovered through the actions taken by the various regional offices of the Office of the Solicitor, raising the combined total of money recovered plus future credit to over $11 million.
During fiscal year 1989, the Division provided litigation support to the Department of Justice in connection with numerous suits filed against the United States.
These efforts, in part, were responsible for several favorable decisions.
Thus, in Costa v. United States, No. 89-1403 (Fed. Cir. July 18, 1989), the Federal Circuit held, in declining to hear appellant's claim that he was denied due process in connection with his claim for FECA benefits, that FECA's bar against judicial review set forth at 5 U.S.C. §8128(b), and the court's own jurisdictional statute, deprived it of jurisdiction.
The United States Court of Claim also dismissed an action seeking to challenge a decision denying benefits under the 1989).
Owens v. Brock, 860 F. 2d 1363 (6th Cir. Nov. 10, 1988), involved the question whether the Equal Access to Justice Act (EAJA), 5 U.S.C. 504, applies to proceedings under the FECA.
The Sixth Circuit held, on two independent grounds, that the EAJA does not apply to administrative proceedings under the FECA.
The court held, first, that proceedings under the FECA are not "adversary adjudications" as that term is defined in the EAJA.
Section 504(b)(1)(C) of 5 U.S.C. provides that adversary adjudication "means an adjudication under section 554 of this title in which the position of the United States is represented by counsel or otherwise..."
Noting that 5 U.S.C. 8124(b)(2) specifically provides that hearings before OWCP hearing representatives are not covered by 5 U.S.C. 554, the court concluded that FECA proceedings are not adversary adjudications within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 504(b)(1)(C), and therefore the EAJA does not apply to administrative proceedings under the FECA.
The second independent ground relied upon by the Sixth Circuit is perhaps more significant.
The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, in Brumley v. U.S. Department of Labor, No. 88-1587 (8th Cir. Feb. 21, 1989), also concluded that EAJA does not apply to FECA proceedings.
Following issuance of the Supreme Court's decision in Pittston Coal Group v. Sebben (1988), which upheld the Department's position that the Court of Appeals improperly required the Black Lung Benefits Act reopening of thousands of claims that had been finally decided the plaintiff attempted to amend his complaint.
The Division prepared and filed a response in opposition to such action; the district court sustained our position.
Another civil action involving the Black Lung Benefits Act, Howell v. Dole, No. 88-303 (D. Ky.), sought to compel the Secretary to (1) immediately decide all pending petitions for attorney fees filed in Black Lung cases, (2) pay all attorneys at the rate of $125.00 per hour, and (3) consider the risk of loss to the attorney as a factor in determining the amount of the fee to be awarded.
The plaintiff, an attorney, also claimed that the administration of the Black Lung attorney fee system violated the due process rights of claimants.
In an order filed July 7, 1989, the court denied plaintiff's motion for class certification on the grounds that plaintiff failed to meet any of the requirements of Rule 23, Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, that Howell's position as both a plaintiff and as counsel in the suit disqualified him as being an adequate representative for the purported class, and that plaintiff lacked standing to assert the constitutional rights of Black Lung claimants.
Litigation before the courts of appeals under the Longshore Act is customarily very active.
This year was no exception.
Twenty-two opinions, addressing a wide variety of issues, were published.
While many opinions confirmed or clarified existing precedents, several broke new ground, resolving issues of first impression.
The Fifth Circuit, sitting en banc, reversed the decision of a unanimous panel in a case involving coverage of shore-side employees under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act extension of the Longshore Act.
Mills v. Director, OWCP, 877 F.2d 356 (1989) (en banc), reversing 846 F.2d 1013 (5th Cir. 1988).
By a nine-to-five vote, the majority rejected the Department's position and held that the Longshore Act compensation remedy in the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act implicitly includes a "situs of injury" requirement and so applies only to workers injured on a platform on the Outer Continental Shelf or on the waters over the Shelf.
Thus, workers like Mills, injured at a fabrication yard on the coast while building a platform for use on the Shelf, are beyond the Act's coverage.
The majority's situs-of-injury requirement creates a direct conflict with the Third Circuit's opinion in Curtis v. Schlumberger Offshore Services, Inc., 849 F.2d 805 (1988).
In Eymard & Sons Shipyard, et al. v. Smith, 862 F.2d 1220 (1989), the Fifth Circuit issued a favorable decision rejecting the employer's application for second injury fund relief from compensation liability under section 8(f) of the Longshore Act.
The court held that where the claimant's lung disease was not "manifest," because it was neither diagnosed by his treating physicians, nor clearly indicated by correlating their reports, the requirements for section 8(f) relief were not established.
In a similar case involving section 8(f) relief, the Sixth Circuit interpreted the "manifest" requirement differently, holding that evidence of lung disease on an X-ray taken prior to an employee's second injury, even though no diagnosis was made from that X-ray until after the second injury, was sufficient documentation of the pre-existing condition to meet the "manifest" requirement of section 8(f).
The American Ship Building Co. v. Director, OWCP (Logan), 865 F.2d 727 (1989).
Questions regarding credit for compensation previously paid for injuries were addressed in three opinions.
The principal issue presented in Director, OWCP v. Bethlehem Steel Corp. (Brown), 868 F.2d 759 (5th Cir. 1989), concerned who receives the benefit of the credit for compensation previously paid for a "scheduled" injury when a second inju:y to the same bodily member increases the employee's disability and the employer is entitled to relief from liability from the Special Fund through section 8(f) of the Longshore Act.
The Court agreed with the Director's argument and held that the actual dollars paid for the prior injury must first reduce the total award before there is any allocation of liabilities between the employer and Special Fund.
Thus, the Special Fund gets the credit and the employer remains liable for the full amount of compensation payable for the second injury, or for 104 weeks of payments, whichever is less.
In I.T.O. Corp. v. Director, OWCP, 883 F.2d 422 (5th Cir.
1989), the Court agreed with the Director's position that no credit against liability for permanent total disability compensation is allowed for permanent partial disability payments made for a prior injury, whether payments are continuing or a settlement was effected; the right to compensation for permanent partial loss of earning capacity and the right to benefits for permanent total disability resulting from a later injury are concurrent, with no effect on one another.
The court rejected ITO's argument that it was entitled to a credit under section 3(e) of the Longshore Act noting that section 3(e) applies only where prior compensation was paid under a state workers' compensation provision or the Jones Act.
The panel also noted that the "credit doctrine" approved by the en banc Fifth Circuit in Strachan Shipping Co. v. Nash, 782 F.2d 513 (5th Cir. 1986) applies only to "scheduled" permanent partial disability awards.
Finally, in Lustig v. Todd Pacific Shipyards, 881 F.2d 593 (9th Cir. 1989), the Ninth Circuit agreed that, although compensation payments for the same disability made under a state statute should be credited against the employer's Longshore Act liability in accordance with section 3(e), neither attorney fees paid to a claimant's representative, nor money paid to a medical association in reimbursement of medical expenses should be credited against the claimant's Longshore Act compensation, as neither amount was received by the claimant and no impermissible double recovery had occurred.
In Lustig, the Court also held that the insurer during the last employment in which the claimant was exposed to a harmful substance, prior to the date on which he became aware that he had an occupational disease, is liable for compensation.
The Fifth Circuit addressed the "status" requirement for Longshore Act coverage in Universal Fabricators, Inc. v. Smith, 878 F.2d 843 (1989).
The Court, agreeing with the Director, held that the "status" requirement had been met where the claimant spent a significant portion of his time in longshore operations, even though he was engaged in non-maritime activities on the day he was injured.
Thus, the employee was entitled to Longshore Act compensation.
The Second Circuit, in LaFaille v. Benefits Review Board, 884 F.2d 54 (1989), addressed an important issue of first impression under the Longshore Act Amendments of 1984, concerning the appropriate average weekly wage to be used in computing disability benefits in those occupational disease cases in which there is a delay between the onset of disability and the subsequent diagnosis of the disabling disease's occupational origin.
The Court rejected the Director's position that the worker's earnings at the time of onset of disability should always be used, rather than the earnings at the time of diagnosis.
Apparently, the Court so held because there was little difference between the two earnings figures in this particular case.
A significant issue of liability for death benefits under the Longshore Act, where permanent total disability commenced prior to the 1972 Amendments to the Act and death occurred several years after 1972, was decided by the First Circuit in Director, OWCP v. Bath Iron Works (Lebel), 885 F.2d 983 (1989).
The Court thoroughly analyzed the benefit-rate amendments made to the Act in 1972 and agreed with the Director that death benefits at the amended rates are the responsibility of the employer, rather than being payable in large part out of Federal appropriations and the Special Fund, even though the employer's liability for compensation payments to the worker for permanent total disability prior to his death had been substantially reduced in accordance with other provisions of the 1972 Amendments.
In so holding, the Court rejected the only other authority on point, Director, OWCP v. Detroit Harbor Terminals, Inc., 850 F.2d 283 (6th Cir. 1988).
An issue of first impression was favorably resolved by the First Circuit in B.S. Costello, Inc. v. Meagher, 867 F.2d 722 (1989).
By a two-to-one vote, the Court agreed with the Director's position that an employer that had insured its workers'compensation benefits liability under the Longshore Act remained liable for payment of compensation to its injured employee, and the survivors of a deceased employee, upon the insolvency of the carrier.
In Rivere v. Offshore Painting Contractors, 822 F.2d 1187 (5th Cir. 1989), the Court granted the Director's extraordinary emergency motion for summary reversal of a Benefits Review Board order staying payment of benefits awarded under the Longshore Act.
In so doing, the Court affirmed the validity of the Secretary's regulation prohibiting the BRB from issuing such a stay without making a specific finding of irreparable injury based on evidence and specifying the nature and extent of the injury.
The question of the Board's authority to ignore the Secretary's regulation regarding the prerequisites for granting a stay had evaded court review since 1986, when the Board first declared the regulation invalid.
Three courts issued decisions resolving jurisdictional questions arising under the Longshore Act.
In Jeffboat, Inc. v. Mann, 875 F.2d 660 (7th Cir. 1989), the Court agreed that the 30-day period for filing an appeal to the Benefits Review Board from an adverse administrative law judge decision began on the day the judge's order was filed in the Office of the Deputy Commissioner, notwithstanding the deputy commissioner's failure to mail a copy to the employer's counsel at the time copies were mailed to the employer and employee, so that an appeal filed more than 30 days from the date of filing the order was properly dismissed by the BRB for lack of jurisdiction.
The Ninth Circuit, in Bish v. Brady-Hamilton Stevedore Co., 880 F.2d 1135 (1989), agreed that a decision of the Benefits Review Board, vacating and remanding for further consideration an order of an administrative law judge, was not a final appealable order.
The Court joined several other circuits in holding that such remand orders are not "collateral orders" excepted from the requirement of finality even where they conclusively resolve important issues separate from the merits because the issues would be reviewable following the decision on remand.
The Fifth Circuit ruled that the 30-day time for filing a notice of appeal to the Benefits Review Board is measured from the date an administrative law judge rules on a motion to withdraw a prior timely filed motion for reconsideration in Tideland Welding Service v. Sawyer, 881 F.2d 157 (1989).
In addition to participating in cases pending before the United States courts of appeals, the Division represented the Director, OWCP, in numerous appeals filed with the Benefits Review Board, and in cases being heard by the Office of Administrative Law Judges.
Several regional offices have also undertaken substantial litigation responsibilities in cases before the OALJ, as they have since this litigation was decentralized in 1987.
Such participation was at least partially responsible for several administrative decisions of particular importance with regard to the continued development of the law under the 1984 Longshore Act amendments and the protection of the special fund against questionable claims filed by employers/carriers for relief under section 8(f of the Act.
The Division also represented the Director, OWCP, in appeals filed with the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board (ECAB) under the FECA.
Several important decisions involving issues of first impression were issued by the ECAB during FY 1989.
In the case of Marie D. Sinnett, Docket No. 88-1531 (issued June 19, 1989), the ECAB addressed the relationship between the FECA and § 11 of the Debt Collection Act of 1982 (DCA) (codified at 31 U.S.C. § 3717).
The OWCP had recently implemented several new procedures provided for by the DCA to assist it in its efforts to aggressively collect overpayments.
In Sinnett, the ECAB affirmed the OWCP's imposition of interest on a debt arising from an overpayment of compensation benefits as provided in § 11 of the DCA, noting that the FECA does not prohibit the charging of interest on overpayments.
The ECAB also affirmed the OWCP's use of its hearing representatives to rule on requests for waiver of interest, rather than requiring that these decisions be made by administrative law judges.
On June 1, 1987, the OWCP began to apply its new regulations, promulgated in the Federal Register on April 1, 1987 (52 FR 10486), to initial decisions made on claims under the FECA.
Turning to the supplementary information published with the new regulations, the ECAB noted that the OWCP had indicated that the new regulations were "applicable only to initial decisions made on and after the effective date" of June 1, 1987.
The ECAB interpreted this phrase to mean "an initial decision on a particular issue, not a decision on any aspect of a claim."
Under this construction, the ECAB affirmed the OWCP's adjudication of the employee's claim for a recurrence of disability under the new regulations, despite the fact that an earlier claim for a period of disability had been adjudicated under the OWCP's old regulations.
With this decision, the ECAB approved the OWCP's application of its new regulations to the many new issues that inevitably arise out of old claims made under the FECA.
In a third case, Gordon R. Woodruff, Docket No. 89-390 (issued May 26, 1989), the ECAB faced a stiff challenge to its line of precedent defining the concept of "premises" for compensation purposes.
The claimant had been severely injured in an automobile accident on the grounds of a military reservation during his lunch period and the OWCP had accepted his claim for payment, despite the claimant's expressed desire to file a tort action for negligence against his employer.
On appeal, the claimant argued that certain Federal court determinations on the issue of what constitutes the "premises" of a Federal employing agency should control to preclude coverage under the FECA.
However, the ECAB agreed with the OWCP's argument that while such Federal court determinations were instructive, they were not binding on either the OWCP or the ECAB in light of their exclusive jurisdiction granted by 5 U.S.C. § 8128(b) to decide all questions arising under the FECA.
The passage by Congress of a number of new legislative initiatives and of major revisions to several existing programs provided substantial challenges to the Division during Fiscal Year 1989.
Enactment of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act (P.L. 100-418) (OTCA) and the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (WARN) Act (P.L. 100- 379) necessitated rapid coordination with client agency personnel, development of regulatory packages for the new programs for dislocated workers and for plant closing/mass layoff notifications.
Subtitle D of Title VI of OTCA, the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance Act (EDWAA), revises Title III of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), establishing a new delivery system and new services for dislocated workers.
EDWAA's requirement that regulations be published by November 1, 1988, and the need for regulations to be in place in time for planning for Program Year 1989 (July 1, 1989 to June 30, 1990) activities necessitated expeditious development of an interim final rule.
This Division's staff worked with staff of the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) in developing the interim final rule which was published on October 24, 1988.
A final rule was published on September 22, 1989.
The OTCA also included extensive amendments to the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program under the Trade Act of 1974, and required close coordination with State agencies in the administration of State unemployment compensation laws and the new EDWAA dislocated worker program.
Most of the amendments to the TAA program took effect upon enactment of the OTCA, while others had a 90-day delay in effective date and thus took effect in November 1988.
Since the States administer the TAA program as agents of the United States, under agreements with the Secretary of Labor, operating instructions were issued to the States and published in the Federal Register less than a month after the enactment of the OTCA.
A proposal for extensively amending the TAA regulations was published in November 1988.
The Division provided interpretative advice and assistance in the preparation and publication of the operating instructions and the proposed regulations, and has continued to furnish advice and assistance as myriad questions have arisen in the TAA program and in connection with the issuance of two major changes in the operating instructions and preparation of the final regulations.
The WARN Act requires covered employers closing sites of employment or engaging in mass layoffs to provide 60 days' advance notice to workers and various governmental units.
Enacted on August 4, 1988, with an effective date of February 4, 1989, the law provides no enforcement role to the Department of Labor (DOL), but mandates that the Secretary issue interpretative regulations.
Prompt development of legal policy papers and opinions on this novel area of law were necessitated.
This Division assisted ETA in drafting a discussion paper, which was published on October 28, 1988, and an interim interpretative rule with a request for comments, which was published on December 2, 1988.
The WARN final rule, revising 20 CFR Part 639 and replacing the interim interpretative rule, was published on April 20, 1989.
The program statute for the Disaster Unemployment Assistance program also was amended this year, and the Division has provided detailed legal services in connection with discussions between ETA and the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in the preparation of operating instructions to the States, and in the preparation of amendments to the regulations.
The Division also furnished advice and assistance in the drafting of the regulations for the airline employee protection program, which is not yet active in the nation.
On November 7, 1988, Congress enacted the Jobs for Employable Dependent Individuals Act (Pub. L. 100-628).
The Act established an incentive bonus program for States which provide services for certain categories of individuals and move the individuals off various assistance programs and into jobs.
The Division has participated with ETA staff in developing a draft proposed rule for the program.
Title II of the Family Support Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100- 485), established the Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training (JOBS) Prográm, which replaces the Work Incentive (WIN) Program (Part C of Title IV of the Social Security Act of 1935, 42 U.S.C. 630 et seq.), which was repealed, effective October 1, 1990.
We assisted ETA in proposing regulations under this program which are to be issued jointly by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the Secretary of Labor.
Implementation of the new temporary alien agricultural labor certification ("H-2A") program created under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA), P.L. 99- 603, continued to provide an important focus for the Division in fiscal year 1989.
The Division worked closely with the United States Employment Service (USES), the Department of Agriculture, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and other interested agencies in developing a final rule, which was published on July 5, 1989, setting a methodology for determining the Adverse Effect Wage Rate (AEWR), the hourly wage rate at which agricultural jobs for which temporary alien workers are sought must be offered in order to avoid the adverse effect of the importation of those workers.
We also assisted the USES staff in developing a draft proposed rule to amend the interim final rule, to take into account comments on the 1986-87 rulemaking and to make other changes to the interim final rule.
The Division achieved a number of significant victories at the district and circuit court levels under the new H-2A program in FY 1989.
The most significant victories occurred in AFL-CIO v. McLaughlin (D.D.C.), where farmworkers challenged the Department's June 1, 1987 H-2A regulations for determining piece rates and setting AEWRs for the importation of temporary nonimmigrant agricultural workers under IRCA.
In August of this year, the D.C. Circuit ended the two year old challenge to the methodology for determining the AEWR, ruling that the suit which had been originally filed in June 1987 was rendered moot by the publication of the new AEWR rule in July 1989.
That rule adopted the same methodology but advanced a different explanation and utilized additional data beyond what had been relied on in the original regulation.
At year's end, cross motions for summary judgment were scheduled with a decision expected in early 1990.
In September, the D.C. Circuit upheld DOL's regulation governing the appropriate piece rates to be paid by employers utilizing that method of payment.
The regulation was challenged on the basis that DOL had not adequately explained its departure from its past policy of requiring proportional increases in piece rates and of protecting piece rate paid workers against the possibility of piece rate stagnation.
The district court had accepted these arguments and struck down the regulations despite our efforts to show that there never was such a policy.
The court of appeals reversed, finding that there was no policy of the sort found by the district court and, in fact, that DOL's policy consistently had been to protect workers against grower efforts to require productivity increases as hourly wages rose.
The court also found that the H-2A piece rate regulation "conforms both with the DOL's past practice and with [IRCA's] requirement that domestic workers be protected from the adverse effect of alien labor."
The Division also achieved a marked degree of success in dealing with issues arising from the expanding H-2A program.
As a result of the application of new sanctions to agricultural employers hiring undocumented aliens under IRCA, ranchers in Texas, and apple growers in the States of Washington and Oregon sought temporary alien labor certifications for the first time under the H-2A program.
Litigation quickly ensued with respect to each new application.
In Torres v. Dole, (W.D. Texas), DOL's "special purpose AEWR" for sheepherders was challenged.
In Alejandre-Corona v. Dole, (E.D. Wash.), DOL's approval of a quality standard for apple pickers which was contained in a job order pertaining to an H-2A temporary labor certification application was challenged.
In Rodriguez v. Dole, (W.D. Texas), farmworkers contended that employers must offer transportation advances.
By year's end, however, the suit in Torres was withdrawn and the district courts in Washington and Texas, doubting the likelihood of success on the merits, had refused to grant preliminary relief to plaintiffs.
In ongoing litigation under the pre-IRCA program for the admission of temporary nonimmigrant agricultural workers (the "H-2" program), we received a number of important decisions at the district court level.
The district court for the Southern District of New York, in Morrison v. DOL, 713 F.Supp.
664 (S.D. N.Y. 1989), dismissed all counts against DOL and the growers as moot.
In that case, growers sought to change their method of payment from a piece rate to an hourly wage.
The standard prevailing wage rate calculations did not provide a basis for developing a prevailing wage rate.
In order to process the existing requests for workers, a decision was made to set the AEWR as the prevailing rate.
In its decision, the court dismissed the case on the grounds that the growers had legitimately relied on DOL's advice about the wage rates they could pay for the 1986 harvest and that it would be inequitable to require them to pay any additional wages to the workers.
The only ruling in the plaintiffs'favor was the court's holding that the original prevailing rate determination was erroneous and a new methodology was needed.
The court found, however, that since there was no need to use any new methodology for the 1986 harvest season, the challenges to it were moot and the plaintiffs lacked standing to challenge any future application of the methodology.
In other ongoing temporary labor certification matters, we received a favorable decision from the United States District Court for the District of Columbia in Frederick County Fruit Growers Association, Inc. v. McLaughlin, where the court summarily dismissed a challenge to the Secretary's application of the regulations requiring proportionately increased piece rates under the H-2 program.
The court granted our motion to compel payment of back wages owing because of the growers' failure to pay the increased piece rates in the 1985 harvest season.
The court rejected the growers' argument that they were not bound by the court's prior interpretation of the regulations.
Even though the growers were not parties, they were aware of the pendency of the prior lawsuits, knew full well that the outcome would affect their interests, and deliberately chose not to participate.
In other immigration related matters, the court in WJA Realty Limited Partnership v. Nelson, (S.D. Fla.), invalidated the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) regulation at 8 C.F.R. § 214.2(h)(14)(iv), which regulates the status of temporary alien workers during labor disputes.
The court found that the regulation, in effectively foreclosing the alien workers from exercising their right to refrain from striking, runs counter to the policy and the essential purposes of the National Labor Relations Act.
In the latest chapter in litigation commenced by the farmworker advocates in 1982, we received a favorable decision from the United States District Court for the District of Columbia.
In NAACP v. McLaughlin, plaintiffs sought to have the Secretary held in contempt for declining to impose sanctions upon certain East Coast apple growers found to have paid unlawfully low piece rate wages to their workers during the 1986 harvest season.
While not directly addressing plaintiffs' contempt argument, the court denied any relief, finding that the Secretary's refusal to impose sanctions under the Act and regulations is purely discretionary and thus immune from judicial review.
In the area of permanent alien labor certification, the Division's administrative litigation before the Board of Alien Labor Certification Appeals (BALCA) continued to mold a consistent body of precedent upon which ETA certifying officers can rely.
The Division continues to provide considerable assistance to ETA in focusing ETA's efforts to respond to the developing body of BALCA case law.
In a significant decision, Information Industries, 88-INA-82, BALCA developed a formula for applying the "business necessity" test, which requires that an employer demonstrate that any unusual job requirement is justified by business necessity.
BALCA rejected the language of Ratnayake v. Mack, 499 F.2d 385 (5th Cir. 1971), which would have allowed employers to impose job requirements if they were reasonable but not necessary.
Although BALCA adopted new language to describe the business necessity standard, the standard has thus far been applied by BALCA in a manner consistent with ETA's long standing interpretation of that term.
At the circuit court level, the court upheld the denial of labor certification in Hall v. McLaughlin, 864 F.2d 868 (D.C. Cir. 1989).
In that case, where the alien owned 51 percent of the shares of the corporation, the court agreed that the alien and the employer were one and the same and that no employment relationship existed as required by regulation.
However, in Ashbrook-Simon-Hartley, Inc. v. McLaughlin, 863 F.2d 410 (5th Cir. 1989), the circuit court affirmed the district court, holding that DOL must take into account the job duties in its consideration of labor certification applications.
We received a favorable decision from the Fifth Circuit in The Sweet Life v. Dole, where the court held that the employer failed to exhaust administrative remedies where it chose to ignore its appeal rights to the INS and brought an action against DOL in district court.
The Division also assisted the Employment and Training Administration in updating and "streamlining" its Job Corps regulations.
A draft proposed rule was published in the Federal Register on March 4, 1989 and the Division assisted ETA in considering the comments on the proposed rule and in preparing the final rule.
The Division continued to participate regularly in the Department's national activities involving coordination of farmworker-related legal advice and representation at intragovernmental, departmental, and public meetings.
The Division continued to provide a wide range of advice and assistance to ETA in matters arising under the Job Training Partnership Act amd worked closely with ETA in the development of new policy guidance on the uses of Fixed Unit Price Performance Based contracts under JTPA.
The Division assisted ETA in its biennial selection of new grantees for Native American and Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker programs under Title IV of JTPA.
The Division also worked closely with ETA in the ongoing process of providing formal advice to JTPA grantees.
While litigation under the JTPA increased, the Division continued to litigate under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act ("CETA").
In a decision regarding ETA's right to collect misspent CETA funds after the repeal of CETA, the Ninth Circuit, in Inland Manpower Association v. USDOL, 882 F.2d 343 (9th Cir. 1989), held that nothing in the transition provisions of the JTPA precluded the collection of CETA funds.
The court concluded that the effect of the repeal of CETA was merely to subject proceedings commenced after September 30, 1984 to the jurisdictional and remedial provisions of the JTPA, which, the court found, are identical to those of CETA for debt collection purposes.
Specialized assistance in the area of acquisition law (i.e., contracts and grants) was provided by the Division to contract and grant officers in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM), in ETA, and in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and Training (OASVET).
The Division also participated on the Department's Procurement Review Board, advised OASAM on rulemaking actions related to the Department of Labor rulemaking as part of a governmentwide common rule implementing the requirements of the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 200-690) for drug-free workplaces under grants, and assisted in rulemaking actions effectuating final and proposed revisions of Office of Management and Budget Circulars A-102 and A-110 relating to agreements with State and local governments and nonprofit organizations.
Division staff also have been actively involved in the implementation of the new procurement integrity rules.
The Division continued to provide a broad range of legal advice services to the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and Training in such areas as training programs for veterans, the Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program and the establishment of employment and training programs for homeless veterans under the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act.
The Division also worked closely with OASVET in devėloping agreements to implement provisions of P.L. 100-527, the Department of Veterans Affairs Act, which require coordination between OASVET, DOL and the new Department of Veterans Affairs.
In the unemployment compensation area, which includes the Federal-State unemployment compensation program and the related Federal programs of unemployment compensation for Federal civilian employees and ex-service members, the TAA program, and Disaster Unemployment Assistance, the Division furnished a wide range of legal advice and assistance to ETA and other Departmental officials.
The Division furnished a variety of legal services on a host of matters arising under the Federal-State unemployment compensation program, including conformity and compliance proceedings involving permissible deductions from unemployment benefits, new requirements for the States involving the disclosure of unemployment insurance information for the purposes of the Federal Parent Locator Service in the Department of Health and Human Services and for the purposes of certain housing assistance programs under the jurisdiction of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the continuing controversy over the classes of aliens that may be considered to be in the eligible status of permanently residing in the United States under color of law.
In addition to these matters, other important items have necessitated advice and assistance to ETA and other Departmental officials, including the proposed revision of the Quality Control program to include revenue quality control, investment of money in State unemployment funds, the required disclosure of State unemployment compensation records, the permissible and required deductions from State unemployment benefits, and the transfer to the District of Columbia government of title to the DC Employment Security building.
In litigation arising under the Trade Act, we received a favorable decision in International Union, UAW v. Dole, where the district court for the Eastern District of Michigan agreed with our position that the plain language of the Trade Act made federal eligibility standards mandatory upon the States and not subject to waiver and that the administrative provisions only provided for review of decisions implementing those standards under the same procedures as the State uses to hear its own unemployment insurance cases.
During fiscal year 1989, the Department engaged in a variety of appellate and district court litigation of significance to the Department's fair labor standards policies and programs.
Significant appellate litigation under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) included the consolidated cases, Brock v. Wendell's Woodwork, Inc. and Brock v. McGee Brothers Co., 867 F.2d 196 (1989), in which the Fourth Circuit affirmed the district court's judgment enjoining violations of the FLSA and its child labor provisions and awarding back wages to affected minors and other workers.
The cases involved members of the Shiloh True Light Church of Christ, a sect based in Charlotte, NC.
Defendants employed minors, some as young as 9 or 10 years of age, in their commercial woodworking and masonry construction businesses.
Among other duties, the children operated power saws and other power-driven woodworking machinery, and forklifts in violation of the Secretary's orders proscribing the performance of such hazardous work activities.
The appeals court held that "[t]he district court properly concluded . . . that the enforcement of [the FLSA and its child labor provisions] may not be defeated by a claim by a church member of free exercise rights under the First Amendment."
The court concluded: "[TJhe interest of the United States in the even-handed application and enforcement of its labor laws must prevail over the interests of church members who attempt to transport a vocational training program into industrial and commercial environments where children, save for their ages, are indistinguishable from other employees."
In McLaughlin v. Ensley, 877 F.2d 1207 (1989), the Fourth Circuit reversed the district court and held that so-called "trainees" are actually employees during an unpaid one-week orientation period when they learn the duties of delivery route drivers for defendant's snack food distribution business.
The appeals court held that since the employer received significant benefits from the training, while the "trainees" received little or none, they came within the Act's coverage as employees.
In Dole v. Petroleum Treaters, Inc., 876 F.2d 518 (1989), the Fifth Circuit, reversing the district court, held that workers on oil well service barges were not FLSA-exempt as seamen, because even though the workers performed some traditional seamen duties, they spent over 50 percent of their time on oil well maintenance.
The appeals court approved the Secretary's interpretation, which specifies that the exemption depends on the actual duties performed and that the exemption is available only where workers spend no more than 20 percent of their time on non-maritime duties.
Rejecting the district court's analysis, the appeals court held that the applicability of the exemption is independent of an employee's status as a seaman for purposes of the Jones Act.
The Fourth Circuit entered a favorable decision in Brock v. Hamad, 867 F.2d 804 (1989), affirming the district court's judgment enjoining Hamad from violating the minimum wage, overtime, and recordkeeping provisions of the FLSA and awarding back wages and liquidated damages.
The appeals court upheld the district court's holding that Hamad's rental of residential properties constituted a single enterprise, rejecting arguments that Hamad's operation of the rental properties (which were owned by him or members of his family) lacked a common business purpose and that they were not subject to Hamad's common control; that his enterprise, which he characterized as strictly local in nature, was outside the coverage of the Act pursuant to the Act's "ultimate consumer" provision, 29 U.S.C. 203(i); and that the rental income for the properties should be prorated among the separate owners for purposes of determining whether the volume of business exceeds the $250,000 threshold for enterprises.
The Fifth Circuit issued a favorable decision in McLaughlin v. Seafood, Inc., 867 F.2d 875 (1989), reversing the district court's decision that piece-rate workers in a seafood processing plant were independent contractors and not employees within the meaning of the FLSA.
The Fifth Circuit held that the piece-rate workers were employees even though their employer did not regulate the hours or the details of their work and did not prevent them from working for its competitors.
In reaching its decision, the appeals court held that the decorators, who were paid on a piece-work basis, had no control over the essential determinants of profits in the business and that the decorators'$400 investment in their tools did not compare with the defendant's investment in the total business.
In Brock v. R.J. Auto Parts and Service, Inc., 864 F.2d 677 (1988), the Tenth Circuit reversed the district court's dismissal of the Secretary's FLSA action.
The district court dismissed the case as a sanction for the Secretary's refusal during discovery to disclose the identity of persons who had provided information to the Secretary in connection with the FLSA investigation.
The appeals court, applying traditional discovery principles relating to the pretrial identification of prospective witnesses, held that the district court erred in dismissing the action and imposing litigation costs on the Secretary.
In Brock v. Best Western Sundown Motel, 883 F.2d 51 (1989), the Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision that a family-owned restaurant and motel constitute a single enterprise for purposes of FLSA coverage.
The appeals court, rejecting the employer's argument, held that the district court correctly received testimony from former employees regarding the ongoing organization of the employer's business, even though these witnesses were employed prior to the back wage period encompassed by the case.
The appeals court also rejected the employer's argument that the district court improperly relied upon the testimony of an employee who recanted her testimony after the trial in the case.
In McLaughlin v. Hogar San Jose, 865 F.2d 12 (1989), the First Circuit entered a partially favorable decision affirming the district court in all respects despite cross appeals by the Secretary and the employer in this FLSA case involving minimum wage and overtime violations by a nursing home.
The First Circuit held, in substance, that the district court's finding that the employer had acted in good faith was not clearly erroneous, and that the district court did not abuse its discretion in relieving the employer from liquidated damages.
In Elsberry Inc. v. McLaughlin, 868 F.2d 1525 (1989), the Eleventh Circuit held that the Secretary is authorized by the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA) to make warrantless entries of labor camps and fields to pursue investigations and that MSPA's provision for such entries is not a violation of the Fourth Amendment.
The court also held that a grower's nonforcible efforts to frustrate the Secretary's investigation did not constitute unlawful resistance or interference prohibited by the Act.
In Lockert v. McLaughlin, 867 F.2d 513 (1989), the Ninth Circuit upheld the Secretary's decision in a case arising under the whistleblower provision of the Energy Reorganization Act (ERA).
The court held that there were adequate factual and legal grounds to support the Secretary's determination that the employee was not fired from his quality control position with the Pullman Power Products Corp. for engaging in protected safety-related activities.
In Thompson v. Department of Labor, No. 87-7509, the Ninth Circuit reversed the Secretary's entry of an order in this whistleblower case dismissing the case with prejudice.
The court ruled that the Secretary erred in dismissing the case with prejudice because the parties, in reaching an agreement to settle the case, had not agreed that the case should be dismissed on this basis.
The court remanded the case for further consideration by the Secretary.
Attorney fees were awarded under the Equal Access to Justice Act.
In Couty v. Department of Labor, No. 88-2233, the Eighth Circuit held that the Secretary erred in concluding that the complainant had failed to demonstrate retaliatory motive as an element of his prima facie case in this whistleblower proceeding.
The court ruled that such motive could properly be inferred by the close temporal proximity between safety-related complaints by the employee and his discharge by his employer.
The case was remanded for further proceedings.
Under the contract labor standards program, in Facchiano v. U.S. Department of Labor, 859 F.2d 1163 (1988), the Third Circuit held that a contractor must first exhaust the Department's administrative procedures before seeking judicial review of a decision arising from application of federal contract labor standards.
The court also ruled that the Department must consider the contractor's argument that debarment imposed by a contracting agency precludes the Labor Department from imposing a governmentwide debarment based on the same violations.
In Holt Co. v. IBEW, 868 F.2d 671 (1989), the Fourth Circuit upheld the district court's decision rejecting the Secretary's interpretation of section 4(c) of the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act (SCA) to authorize a "substantial variance" proceeding at the request of a union seeking to raise the wage rates in a contract.
The court held that section 4(c) authorizes proceedings only to lower the rates, not to raise them.
There was a vigorous dissent, asserting that the statutory language is ambiguous and that deference is owed the Secretary's longstanding interpretation, permitting both increases and decreases in contract rates where they are in substantial variance with local prevailing rates.
Although the Secretary participated before the district court, the Secretary did not participate in the appeal.
There are several matters of significance pending in the appellate courts.
In Secretary of Labor and EEOC v.
Shenandoah Baptist Church, 4th Cir.
No. 89-2341, cross appeals have been filed from the district court's judgment awarding back wages for minimum wage and equal pay violations of the FLSA.
The defendant church operates the Roanoke Valley Christian School, which teaches children from preschool through high school.
The school's non-teaching personnel were paid less than the minimum wage; the school's female teachers were paid less than male teachers performing comparable work.
The district court rejected the defense of the church and some of its members (as intervenors) that the relevant statutory provisions did not apply to the school since it was part of the church and therefore outside the reach of the FLSA's enterprise coverage.
The court also rejected the argument that the Act, as applied to the church, unconstitutionally infringed upon its rights under the First Amendment.
Defendant and intervenors have appealed these rulings.
The Secretary and the EEOC have appealed the district court's rulings denying prejudgment interest and injunctive relief.
In Dole v. Woodley, 5th Cir.
No. 89-5577, the Secretary is contesting the district court's largely favorable judgment insofar as it allowed the employer credit against minimum wages due migrant workers for the cost of employer-supplied housing which was declared unfit for human habitation by state authorities.
In Dole v. Hopple Plastics, Inc., 6th Cir.
No. 89- 5696, the Secretary seeks to overturn the district court's ruling, denying on a laches theory the Secretary's claim that an employee (who was fired from her job in violation of the Consumer Credit Protection Act) is entitled to reinstatement and back wages.
In West Extension Irrigation District v. Secretary of Labor, 9th Cir.
No. 89-35124, the Secretary is seeking to sustain the district court's finding that a public agency operating an irrigation system cannot invoke the Act's "irrigation exemption," where some of the water controlled by the agency is utilized for nonagricultural purposes.
By its terms, the exemption is restricted to "the operation or maintenance of [systems] which are used exclusively . . . for agricultural purposes."
In Brock v. Gingerbread House, 10th Cir.
In Pacific Merchant Shipping Association v. Aubry, 9th Cir.
No. 89-55379, the Government as amicus is supporting the State of California's position that it is not prohibited as a matter of statutory, admiralty, or constitutional law from enforcing its wage and hour standards to seamen and other maritime workers employed on vessels located off the California coast.
The Secretary is seeking to overturn the district court's holding that the FLSA operates to preempt California from applying its law to the workers in question.
In Nichols v. Hurley, 10th Cir.
No. 89-7033, the Secretary is participating as amicus in support of employees seeking to overturn the district court's conclusion that deputy sheriffs are exempt from FLSA coverage as the personal staff of an elected official.
There have been several noteworthy decisions concerning the labor standards applicable to federal contracts.
In A to Z Maintenance v. Dole, 710 F. Supp.
853 (D.D.C. 1989), the district court, applying the Secretary's three-part test for assessing whether debarment is appropriate for violations of the SCA, concluded that the Department's debarment decision was supported by a preponderance of the evidence and was not arbitrary or capricious.
The court held that earlier SCA violations by the contractor (though occurring under "unusual circumstances" and mitigating against debarment in those past instances) nevertheless constituted prior violations.
In Helicopter Pilot's Association v. Dole, S.D. Ala.
No. 89-H-288-S, a mandamus action seeking an order to direct the Wage and Hour Administrator to issue a ruling concerning an SCA wage determination, the district court granted the government's motion to dismiss for lack of standing.
The court also observed that attorney fees, which had been sought by petitioner under the Equal Access to Justice Act, were not appropriate because, even if its action served as the catalyst for a ruling by the Administrator, no benefit had inured to petitioner.
In United Health Serv, Inc., 89-CBV-1 (DJR), a decision issued jointly by two administrative law judges, the judges granted summary judgment against the Air Force, which had sought "substantial variance determinations" in several consolidated cases pursuant to section 4(c) of the SCA.
The judges held that a substantial variance can only be established where unusual circumstances exist, e.g., less than arms-length negotiations; they also held that substantial variance cannot be established where the collectively bargained rates are not higher than the federal wage board rates for comparable positions.
The judges' conclusion, if ultimately upheld on appeal, would substantially curtail the availability of section 4(c) to contractors and contracting agencies, and would constrict the Wage and Hour Administrator's discretion in referring such cases for hearings.
In a case handled by the Atlanta region, U.S. Department of Labor v. DWS, Inc., No. 87- SCA-129, a successful settlement was obtained in this SCA case whereby the ALJ adopted consent findings that had been entered by the bankruptcy court in a proceeding involving DWS, a company providing helicopter instruction at Fort Rucker, AL.
Under the findings the affected employees likely will receive full payment on SCA wages and fringe benefits owed them.
In a case arising under a new statute, the Employee Polygraph Protection Act, which became effective on December 27, 1989, the district court held that the plaintiff, a polygraph examiner, lacked standing to challenge the constitutionality of the Act because he did not fall within the "zone of interests" protected or regulated by the Act.
Gugas v. McLaughlin, C.D. Cal.
No. 88-04745.
In Southwest Lighthouse for the Blind, Inc., No. 89-FLS-1, an administrative law judge hearing has been scheduled on a petition for review of the special minimum wage rate paid by the employer.
The petition was filed on behalf of several employees pursuant to 29 U.S.C. 214(c)(5)(A).
This will be the first hearing under this section of the FLSA.
Several actions seeking enforcement of the industrial homework restrictions imposed by the Department's FLSA regulations have been instituted by the regional offices.
In one case, Brock v. Bordeaux, Inc., S.D. Iowa No. 86-104, the Kansas City region, after extensive discovery, reached settlement whereby the employer agreed to pay back wages of more than $150,000 to seamstresses who had been employed in violation of existing homework prohibitions (embroideries industry); a permanent injunction was also obtained against the employer.
As the discussion above demonstrates, the regional offices have pursued a variety of significant cases.
These enforcement efforts continue.
The New York region reports several FLSA cases.
In Dole v. DialAmerica Marketing, Inc., D. N.J. 716 F. Supp.
812 (D. NJ. 1989) the district court entered a favorable decision, finding that defendant violated the Act's minimum wage and recordkeeping provisions.
The company employs homeworkers to research telephone numbers for its telephone marketing program.
Relying upon representative testimony of employees and statistical evidence offered by other witnesses, the court determined that the Secretary had proven the violations and provided a sufficient basis upon which to compute back wages.
Awarding injunctive relief and prejudgment interest, the court directed that proceedings be held before a magistrate for calculation of amounts due individual employees.
A total award of about $400,000 is expected.
In McLaughlin v. Tri-Way Security and Escort Service, Inc., E.D. N.Y. No. 87-CIV-0122, the Secretary received a favorable decision enjoining overtime and recordkeeping violations and awarding overtime compensation over $300,000, plus an equal amount of liquidated damages to about 650 security guards.
After paying about $170,000, defendants filed for bankruptcy.
In Dole v. Waldbaum, Inc., E.D. N.Y. No. 86- 861, the Secretary is seeking overtime compensation for approximately 400 employees.
Back wages are estimated in excess of $2 million.
In Dole v. Cooper Electric Supply Co., Inc., D. N.J. No.
CV-87-2568, the Secretary seeks to enjoin overtime violations.
Defendants have asserted that the affected employees, who work as inside sales persons, are exempt as administrative employees.
In Dole v. Haulaway, Inc., D. N.J. No.
CV-87-2938, the Secretary obtained a judgment for $875,000 in overtime compensation and liquidated damages due 185 garbage truck drivers and helpers.
In Dole v. State of New York, ND.
N.Y., No. 89-CV-850, the Secretary has entered into a consent judgment and the New York State Division for Youth (DFY) shall pay over a period of 3 years, of about $3 million in overtime compensation due about 500 employees.
The DFY operates community residences to provide for the needs of youths referred to the agency by state courts.
The agency paid individuals employed as houseparents only a straight weekly salary for 40 hours, although they worked as many as 70 hours.
The Atlanta region reports several decisions yielding substantial monetary awards.
In Dole v. Potter Enterprises, Inc., N.D. Ga.
No. 4:87-CV-323-HLM (1989), the Secretary obtained a consent judgment enjoining construction and rental businesses from future violations of the FLSA and ordering payment of back wages and liquidated damages of about $500,000.
In McLaughlin v. Weddington Tucker Company, Inc., E.D. Ky.
No. 87-221 (1989) and Dole v. Furtex Fabrics, Inc., E.D. Tenn.
No. 3- 89-4 (1989), defendant-companies were enjoined from shipping goods after the companies missed payrolls.
The "hot goods" injunctions in these FLSA actions resulted in the recovery of substantial back wages for affected employees.
In Dole v. Morgan, W.D. Tenn.
No. 78-2387 (1989), the Secretary obtained a judgment in civil contempt against defendant who persisted in violations of the FLSA that had earlier been enjoined; additional back wages, liquidated damages, and interest (on unpaid back wages under the original judgment) totaling about $200,000 were awarded.
In United States v. Phillips, N.D. Fla.
No. 89-05-007-RV (1989), the U.S. Attorney's office successfully prosecuted defendants under 18 U.S.C. 1505 for "obstruction of proceedings."
In Dole v. Opryland Hotel, a division of Opryland, U.S.A., Inc., M.D. Tenn.
No. 3-89-0246, discovery is underway in this FLSA action alleging minimum wage, overtime, and recordkeeping violations.
The Secretary asserts that about 5,000 employees are owed back wages for the uncompensated time expended by them in changing into and out of uniforms (some of which were elaborate and time-consuming to put on) required by their employer.
In a number of cases, the Philadelphia region has obtained substantial monetary awards and favorable rulings on significant legal issues.
In Dole v. Solid Waste Services, E.D. Pa.
No. 88-1066 (1989), over $750,000 was awarded as back wages and liquidated damages against the employer; the court enjoined the employer's future compliance with the FLSA and held that the violations were willful.In Dole v. Odd Fellows Home Endowment Board, No. 84-0096 (N.D. W.Va., 1989), the court awarded about $175,000 in backpay for minimum wage and overtime violations by the employer.
The court found that the employer operated a place of care for elderly and sick persons and therefore was an enterprise within the meaning of the Act.
The court rejected the employer's attempt to take meal and lodging credits against the employees'wages, given the absence of records and the inability of employees to take lunch breaks.