Spurred by the report' of the Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS), the Labor Department stepped up its drive in fiscal year 1991 to prepare the nation to compete in an increasingly competitive global economy by strengthening the education and skills of American workers.
SCANS was part of a broad gauged program pressed by Secretary of Labor Lynn Martin on behalf of American workers.
Other key elements of Secretary Martin's agenda included the "glass ceiling" initiative to remove the barriers that prevent women and minorities from reaching the top echelons of corporate management, stepped up efforts to make the workplace safer, and a legislative proposal designed to substantially increase the number of workers covered by private pensions programs.
In addition to identifying essential skills and abilities, the SCANS report outlined a process for analyzing the fundamental tasks associated with jobs and developing courses in schools and at the workplace to teach these tasks.
Secretary of Labor Lynn Martin urged business, labor and educators to cooperate in an all-out campaign to publicize the SCANS findings and recommendations and adapt them to local needs.
To support this effort, the Labor Department developed a "Blueprint for Action" explaining the SCANS process and how it can be and has been put into action at the local level.
The goal of making full and efficient use of the nation's human resources also was the driving force behind the Department's "glass ceiling initiative."
Following a study of nine Fortune 500 companies, Secretary Martin announced a program to dismantle barriers that keep qualified minorities and women from moving up into management jobs.
The study, carried out under the Department's responsibility to assure that federal contractors don't discriminate in hiring or promotion, found that although the nine companies had different methods for developing individuals, minorities and women were at a disadvantage to some degree in all of them in competing for upper-level management jobs.
To remove glass ceiling barriers in all of the nation's workplaces, the Department launched a long-term effort combining continued reviews of federal contractors' hiring and promotion practices with a campaign of public education and technical assistance designed to reach a wider corporate audience.
Workplace safety and health remained a major focus of Labor Department concern and activity in fiscal 1991.
Penalties totaling more than $6.5 million, the largest aggregate fine in the history of the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), were assessed against some 850 firms for tampering with dust samples that are used to protect coal miners from black lung disease.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) resolved a number of cases involving egregious violations of the law by obtaining million-dollar plus settlements and agreements by the cited employers to correct the violations and adopt corporate-wide abatement programs to prevent their recurrence.
These cases included Phillips 66, which settled for $4 million, and CITGO, which settled for $6 million.
Development of regulations to protect workers who are exposed to bloodborne diseases continued, with OSHA reviewing and analyzing over 3,000 comments on its proposed rules.
The Department's major legislative initiatives included a proposal to expand private pension coverage to more workers, make it easier and less costly for small employers to sponsor pension plans, and enable more workers to take their pension benefits with them when they change jobs.
The Department continued to send the message that employers will pay heavily for serious and willful violations of worker safety and health regulations.
Discovery of widespread tampering in dust samples submitted by coal mine operators prompted the Mine Safety and Health Administration to levy over $6.5 million in civil penalties against the operators of about 850 mines.
The dust sampling fines were part of over $25 million in penalties assessed by MSHA for some 146,000 safety and health violations, a 41 percent increase over the previous year.
Peabody Coal Company was fined $500,000 after pleading guilty to criminal violations of dust sampling regulations.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration handled 26 cases involving egregious safety and health violations.
Many of these cases resulted in fines of more than $1 million.
OSHA held hearings or engageJ in other rule-making activity on a range of worker health and safety concerns, including cadmium, bloodborne pathogens, hazardous waste training, process safety management and motor vehicle safety.
MSHA continued a variety of programs that emphasize ways to identify and prevent conditions and practices that compromise safety and health in the mining industries.
These activities are part of a long-range MSHA effort to eliminate mining fatalities by the year 2000.
Deaths and injuries decreased from the previous year in both coal mining and metal and non-metal mining, with the number of fatalities in metal and non-metal mining dropping to a record low.
The call for improved worker education and training sounded by the Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills received strong backing during the fiscal year from the Employment and Training Administration (ETA).
Efforts continued to strengthen academic and vocational curricula at Job Corps centers and a major media campaign was carried out to attract more women to the program.
A program was initiated to help women get jobs in skilled trades in public utilities, construction, manufacturing, auto repair and other segments of the job market where they have been underrepresented.
The first of five Unemployment Insurance (UI) demonstration projects -- the New Jersey UI Reemployment Demonstration Project -- was completed.
These projects explore ways to use the unemployment insurance system to hasten the return to work of dislocated workers.
Initiatives to make the state employment services more effective continued, with emphasis on improving federal-state communications.
The fourth edition of the "Dictionary of Occupational Titles," a widely used resource in job counseling and placement, was published.
In cooperation with the Departments of Education and Health and Human Services, ETA participated in laying the groundwork for the National Institute for Literacy that was authorized by the National Literacy Act of 1991.
A major ETA legislative initiative advanced during the year when the House passed amendments to the Job Training Partnership Act to improve services to youth and adults with the most severe employment problems.
Some 350,600 workers received more than $115 million in back wages as a result of Employment Standards Administration enforcement activities under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Investigations of the wages paid by government contractors covered by the Davis-Bacon and Service Contract Acts led to the recovery of $40.4 million in back pay.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) completed its review of nine major government contractors to identify barriers that keep qualified minorities and women from advancing in the corporate world.
Findings of the review, which were widely distributed following a press conference held by Secretary Martin, were instrumental in shaping the Department's glass ceiling initiative to encourage companies to make full use of the abilities of all their employees.
OFCCP formed 17 new employer liaison groups as part of its continuing drive to strengthen affirmative action and encourage voluntary compliance with the law.
OFCCP also facilitated voluntary compliance by arranging more than 1,600 linkage groups between employers and agencies that provide worker training and referral services.
An initiative calling for early contact by nurses was credited with helping the Office of Workers Compensation Programs (OWCP) to facilitate the early return to work of a record 1,490 disabled Federal employees.
The agency also found that case openings and rehabilitations increased when certified rehabilitation counselors were used to screen new cases.
To make sure that miners with black lung are being properly compensated, OWCP began an effort that combines bimonthly information mailings with a review of claimants' files.
By the end of the year more than a third of the 45,000 affected cases had been reviewed with the expectation that the process would be completed within a year.
The Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) developed and sought congressional approval of legislation to expand and improve coverage of American workers under employer-sponsored retirement plans.
Opportunities for Workers' Expanded Retirement (POWER), would extend pension coverage to some 42 million additional workers, make it easier for small businesses to sponsor plans, increase the availability of 401(k) plans, simplify pension plan regulation, and encourage workers to save the lump sum payments they receive upon leaving a job.
Enforcement highlights included recovery of more than $178 million for employee benefit plans, assessment of more than $5.5 million in penalties for reporting violations, a record number of criminal investigations referred for prosecution, and establishment of the position of criminal enforcement coordinator.
To improve the quality of pension plan audits, PWBA worked with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants to revise that organization's pension plan audit guide.
The revised publication provides greater guidance to auditors, especially on new regulatory requirements and audit standards for the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.
Cutbacks in the nation's armed forces and the demobilization of reservists called to active duty for Operation Desert Storm resulted in increased emphasis on Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) efforts to help former military personnel reestablish themselves in the civilian labor force.
VETS used a variety of techniques and means to inform the 225,000 reservists mobilized for the Persian Gulf crisis of their rights to return to their civilian jobs.
Many employers went beyond the requirements of the law for their workers called to active duty by voluntarily providing extra benefits, such as making up the difference in civilian and military pay or extending health benefits for families at no cost to the employees.
To help the increasing number of people returning to civilian life from the regular armed forces, VETS expanded the Transition Assistance Program to 90 sites in 23 states.
Almost 22,000 soon-to-be veterans attended the workshops during the year.
The Bureau of Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative Programs published a comprehensive training manual and carried out a variety of other activities to assist organizations in developing team-oriented, high-performance work environments.
Workers facing mass layoffs or plant closings got help from the Bureau in how cooperative programs can be used to find new jobs or obtain training.
To broaden the occupational horizon for women, the Women's Bureau played a key role in Department initiatives to increase the number of women and minorities in upper-level management positions and in apprenticeship programs and nontraditional jobs.
The Bureau continued to operate clearinghouses offering information on steps employers can take to ease work-family conflicts and to build and maintain a quality workforce.
Investigations by the Office of Labor-Management Standards led to record highs of 208 indictments and other criminal actions and 195 convictions and pre-trial diversion agreements during the fiscal year.
Court action in these cases resulted in restitution of more than $4.1 million in union funds and imposition of more than $197,000 in fines.
Fraud and other integrity investigations by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) brought $11.8 million in recoveries, cost efficiencies, restitutions, fines and penalties, and settlements.
To improve efficiency and economy in Department programs and operations, the OIG conducted more than 500 audits, recommending disallowance of $28.7 million in spending and better use of $111.4 million.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs continued to advise Poland and Hungary on labor issues involved in their transition to democracy and free markets.
Similar assistance programs were begun for Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria.
As the Department of Labor continued its role in human resources development, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) continued its work on improving the quality of worker skills through its many programs.
Increasing the focus of the Job Training Partnership Act to help place people in jobs and careers that last.
Improving the school-to-work transition.
Expanding programs that link work-based learning with classroom instruction.
Participating in several joint projects with the Departments of Health and Human Services and Education in the area of job training.
For activities that operate on a program year cycle, information covers Program Year 1990 [July 1, 1990, through June 30, 1991]. For those that operate on a fiscal year basis, information covers Fiscal Year 1991 [October 1, 1990, through September 30, 1991].)
Job Training Partnership Programs.
ETA staff worked closely with the States to improve oversight and correct weaknesses within the system.
The Fourth Annual Job Training Partnership Act Presidential Awards were presented to 18 recipients in recognition of their outstanding contributions to the Nation's training and employment system.
Awards were presented to Outstanding Private Sector Volunteers, Outstanding Private Industry Councils, and Outstanding Training Programs.
The recipients were honored for their energy and dedication to providing quality training and employment opportunities for economically disadvantaged individuals and others who face serious barriers to employment.
Coordinated efforts continued on an interagency agreement signed by the Secretaries of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education to provide joint technical assistance for the implementation of the Job Opportunities and Basic Skills (JOBS) training program.
Following the execution of the interagency agreement, work was initiated on joint technical assistance for JOBS implementation, rulemaking, and resolution of policy issues, as well as continued support for collaboration among the JTPA, JOBS, and education systems at the Federal, State and local levels.
During Program Year 1990, $1.7 billion was appropriated under JTPA Title II-A to serve approximately 1.2 million youths and adults.
Of those served, over 90 percent of participants were economically disadvantaged.
A greater emphasis was placed on providing services to those most in need.
Employment and Training Program (JTPA Title II-B).
Programs under Title III of the Job Training Partnership Act, sometimes referred to as the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance (EDWAA) program, served more than 280,000 participants during PY 1990.
There were usually workers who had been or were about to be laid off from their jobs because of mass layoffs or plant closings, technological change, foreign competition, corporate restructuring, or other economic factors.
A total of $371,868,186 was allotted to the States by formula during PY 1990.
The governors retained up to 40 percent of EDWAA funds for State administration, rapid response, and statewide, industry-wide or regional projects.
At least 60 percent of each State's allotment was distributed to sub-State areas for retraining and basic readjustment services.
A total of $86,868,110 was awarded for 72 EDWAA projects in 29 States from the Secretary of Labor's reserve account.
These projects included services for workers displaced from a variety of industries, including automobile manufacturing, food processing, coal mining, and various other manufacturing and service industries, as well as emergency grants to respond to dislocation resulting from natural disasters.
An additional $4,866,704 was awarded for special dislocated farmers and job creation demonstration projects.
During PY 1990, the Job Corps, authorized by JTPA Title IV, served approximately 61,500 new enrollees, with an average enrollment of 38,800 at any time during the period.
Expenditures budgeted for the year totaled $789.1 million.
Of the 107 Job Corps centers, 68 had some nonresidential enrollees, including two centers with all nonresidential enrollees.
The developmental phase of the initiative to develop a new Computer Managed Instruction (CMI) Academic Education Program in the areas of basic, graded and advanced reading, mathematics, writing/thinking skills, General Educational Development (GED), and World of Work/Exit Readiness was completed in January 1991.
In addition, a cluster of six precollege and advanced skill mini-courses in the areas of education and training, computer literacy, thinking skills, oral communication, advanced writing, and advanced mathematics was developed as optional enhancement classes.
The pilot test of the new Academic Education Program and the corresponding CMI system was in progress and scheduled for completion by December 1991.
Prior to national training and implementation, revisions based on pilot results were to be made to all project components.
An Introduction to Computers program, required for all students, was developed and implemented.
Familiarize the students with the basic personal computer equipment (CPU, Monitor, Drives, and Keyboard).
Expose the students to the various applications of the personal computer.
Job Corps in PY 1990 established an English as a Second Language (ESL) work group in response to a dramatic increase in the number of enrollees with little or no ability in spoken or written English.
The new ESL curriculum was in the development phase and scheduled for pilot testing in PY 91.
A task group was formed to develop an Alternative Learning program to meet the needs of students who are not progressing within the standard academic program.
Development was based on the premise that the difficulties these non-progressing students encounter can be remediated by extending the approaches, techniques and resources available to this targeted population.
Therefore, in addition to academic skill development, the program was to focus attention on student development of learning strategies and life-long learning skills.
As part of the ongoing effort to improve and keep vocational training curricula current with workplace needs, Job Corps in PY 1990 worked with Industry Advisory Boards to review, update and pilot-test 21 of its trade offerings.
In addition, development and pilot testing of two new trade offerings in the field of computer technology were in process.
Continuing its efforts toward external validation of student attainment of vocational tompetencies, Job Corps in 1990 began training its center test administrators in the use of the National Occupational Competency Test.
Training was to be completed and national implementation scheduled to begin in the Fall of 1993.
Testing was conducted in more than half of the vocational areas.
Results evaluated by the National Occupational Competency Testing Institute (NOCTI) indicate that 90 percent of those who complete the Job Corps program perform at or above the level of graduates of state vocational technical institutions.
A series of regional training sessións was in process to train center staff on Social Skill Training (SST) implementation procedures.
The goal of the SST program was to assist students in developing appropriate social behaviors that will enable them to become successful workers and productive citizens.
Implementation was scheduled for 1992.
Many of the linkage projects implemented under the Job Corps II initiative continued.
These projects included: linkages with State or local agencies to provide child care services for students; centers designated by school systems as alternative high schools, enabling them to obtain additional staff, equipment, and curricula assistance; and social services to enroll homeless youth.
The data collection and analysis phase of the evaluation of the two pilot urban non-residential Job Corps centers, located in Philadelphia and New Orleans, was completed, with issuance of a final report scheduled for mid-Program Year 1991.
Job Corps received funding for the first time in PY 1990 to increase the availability of child care services for Job Corps students.
Overall standards and guidelines were developed for use of the funds and operation of child care programs for Job Corps students.
As a result of proposals received, funds were provided for opening a child development program at the Pittsburgh Job Corps Center and for a single parent program at the Turner Job Corps Center in Albany, Georgia.
Native American Programs.
In Program Year 1990 JTPA programs for Native Americans spent an estimated $57 million to provide approximately 28,500 participants with classroom and onthe-job training, work experience, community-service employment, and supportive services.
The programs focused on placement of training participants in the private sector.
Grantee performance continued to improve in PY 1990.
ETA officials made approximately 80 on-site visits to monitor performance and participated in a national grantee-sponsored meeting to provide technical assistance.
Additionally, a training and technical assistance contractor conducted three training seminars for grantees and made eight on-site visits.
In PY 1990 Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker (MSFW) programs under Title IV served, at a total cost of $66 million, more than 53,000 people.
Some 10,000 participants received classroom training, 8,800 were enrolled in on-the-job training, and 1,500 were placed in work-experience positions.
ETA continued its emphasis on working with farmworker youth, with about 8,500 participants aged 14-21 in employment and training activities.
As in previous years, grantees were instructed to refer eligible youth to Job Corps centers.
This year, grantees could also make referrals to programs for high school equivalency degrees and College Assistant Migrant Programs.
A continuing initiative in PY 1990 was in the area of agricultural upgrades.
Grantees placed about 10 percent of their clients in agricultural or agriculturally-related jobs offering upgraded, unsubsidized, full-time employment.
Under JTPA Title IV, ETA provided eight national organizations with a total of $3.9 million in PY 90 to administer training and employment services for people with disabilities.
These organizations served more than 7,600 individuals with such disabling conditions as mental retardation, epilepsy, blindness, and other physical and emotional problems.
More than 96,000 low-income elderly persons received part-time jobs through the $367 million authorized for the Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP) in PY 1990.
About 22 percent of the participants moved from subsidized to unsubsidized positions, many in the private sector and some at community agencies, such as day care centers, nursing homes, fire departments and hospital, where participants worked while enrolled in SCSEP.
To expand the program's outreach to the increasing number of older workers in the general population, ETA encouraged SCSEP operators (National non-profit sponsors and State governments) to link their community-service jobs and training opportunities with JTPA and similar programs.
Work-Based Learning Programs.
In September 1990, the Office of Work-Based Learning awarded six seed-money grants, totaling $3.2 million, to test innovative approaches to improve the schoolto-work transition for youth.
During fiscal year 1991, the six grantees developed models to redesign school curriculum so students learn job-related subjects in a practical context.
Produced promotional materials describing the benefits and features of the program.
Recruited student participants.
Developed curriculum.
Began the implementation phase.
A research project that involved examining successful schoolto-work programs currently in operation in the United States was completed during the fiscal year.
Major findings from this research have been summarized and published in a report entitled "Formulas for Success."
The National Advisory Commission on Work-Based Learning was established in FY 1991 to advise the Secretary of Labor on ways to expand and improve work-based learning.
The commission included leaders from industry, labor, communitybased organizations, government and education.
The commission developed a Plan for Action, and commission members became actively involved in implementing the action steps.
Such measures as developing a framework for a national system of skill standards, exploring the feasibility of industry-wide skill standards, and assisting small and mid-size firms in implementing work-based learning are examples of some of the action steps.
Some leading edge American firms restructured their organizational structures to streamline the management function, change work processes and empower front-line workers.
In an effort to examine and document the change to high performance operations in various settings, the Department of Labor awarded two contracts, totaling $600,000, to two organizations.
Using a case study approach, the two contractors monitored and analyzed the restructuring process in six firms.
The research objectives were to develop information that will assist businesses in deciding whether to reorganize and produce a guide for firms that want to restructure.
In November 1990 the Department announced the Secretary's Initiative for Women in the Skilled Trades and assigned ETA's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) and ESA's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) to enforce Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) in Apprenticeship.
While each agency had lead responsibility for portions of the initiative, BAT acted as the coordinating agency of the Secretary's Order and other activities.
BAT and the other agencies jointly developed training materials and a working relationship document.
The three agencies jointly conducted five regional train-thetrainer sessions for field and key national office staff followed by training for OFCCP field compliance officers.
ETA coordinated the production of a video and two public service announcements.
ETA coordinated the development of three separate brochures to target employers, women's organizations and educational institutions.
ETA funded a contract to undertake research in support of the Initiative.
This research was to provide information on the barriers women experience in seeking job opportunities in the skilled trades and was to include implementation plans for three demonstration programs.
These programs were designed to increase women's participation in, and successful completion of, registered apprenticeship programs.
The Federal Committee on Apprenticeship (FCA), reauthorized as part of the Labor Department's expansion of apprenticeship concepts and programs, met twice during the year in Washington, D.C. Discussions were held on apprenticeship's future role, proposed revisions to the apprenticeship regulations, broadening the apprenticeship concept to all industries, recruiting more women into apprenticeship and otherwise overcoming barriers to expansion, linking apprenticeship to schools and other government training programs, and examining government's role in an expanded apprenticeship system.
In addition, several other concerns or activities were discussed including the use of the GATB, inclusion of OSHA safety standards in apprentice training, preemption of State apprenticeship laws by ERISA and the development of National training standards on an industry basis.
At year's end there are 821 apprenticeable occupations.
Seven occupations were added to the Bureau's List of Occupations recognized as apprenticeable: telecommunications technician; electronic pre-press system operator; dairy technologist; laboratory assistant, metallurgical; painter; pilot, ship, and logistics engineer.
During FY 1991, approximately 374,000 apprentices were trained in over 42,000 civilian apprenticeship programs registered with BAT or State apprenticeship agencies.
Approximately seven percent female and 22 percent minority apprentices were registered at the end of the year.
Also, there were about 46,000 uniformed military apprentices registered in 17 programs which included 35 percent minorities and 6.7 percent females.
More than 1,700 Federally serviced apprenticeship programs were reviewed for EEO compliance, and about 2,000 on-site quality reviews were conducted.
The most recent amendments to the Trade Act were contained in the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, which extended the program to 1993 and made significant changes in coverage and requirements.
According to the provision, which replaced the job-search requirement in the 1985 amendments, training is a worker entitlement and remedial education can be approved as a training activity.
The amendments also determined eligibility on the basis of a worker's most recent separation from employment, authorized TRA payments during scheduled breaks in training, specified procedures for OJT payments, permitted the commingling of training funds, provided benefit information to workers, and required that the TAA program be coordinated with other dislocated worker programs.
The National Governors' Association completed a 1991 study entitled, "A Preliminary Assessment of State Coordination Practices in the Delivery of Dislocated Worker Services."
The findings from the 36-State survey indicated that the level of coordination with the TAA for major retraining and job search/placement were in the 80-plus percent range for those agencies providing unemployment insurance, employment service, education and economic development.
In FY 1991, $65.0 million was allocated to the States for TAA benefits (training, job search allowances, and relocation allowances), compared with $51.6 million in FY 1990, when 18,057 workers entered training, 1,215 were relocated and approximately 565 received job-search assistance.
TRA payments totaling $92.6 million were made to workers in FY 1990.
Adult follow-up employment rate (62 percent of terminees).
Adult weekly earnings at follow-up ($204).
Follow-up welfare employment rate (51 percent of welfare terminees).
Follow-up welfare weekly earnings ($182).
Youth employability enhancement rate (33 percent of youth participants).
The adult and welfare follow-up measures indicated how a program contributes to a participant's long-term employability and economic self-sufficiency as these outcomes are measured 13 weeks after a participant leaves the program.
The youth measures reinforce ETA's emphasis on employment and employability skills by focusing on the acquisition of educational and vocational credentials and by redefining the Youth Entered Employment Rate to exclude from computation those youths who terminate from dropout prevention or recovery programs and do not obtain jobs.
For Title III in PY 1990, governors were required to set an entered employment rate standard (64 percent) and encouraged to set an average wage at placement goal.
Governors continued to have the authority to modify national performance levels for both Title II-A and Title III to account for local conditions that could affect SDA performance, such as economic factors, characteristics of the population served, and kinds of services provided.
ETA annually updates an adjustment methodology that helps governors set standards.
The methodology prevents standards from penalizing SDAs for serving the economically disadvantaged.
Entered employment rate.
Cost per positive termination.
In addition, they had an optional community benefit project measure.
Title IV Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker grantees were required to meet two performance measures: entered employment rate and cost per entered employment.
In November 1990, ETA announced a new initiative for its Job Training for the Homeless Demonstration Program, authorized by the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act.
The initiative's objective was to provide training, support, and housing programs designed to increase employment opportunities, improve job retention, and attain permanent housing for homeless persons.
Twenty-one grantees ran programs under this initiative.
ETA gave priority in the application process to applicants who could obtain commitments from employers and housing providers.
The initiative operated as a "second-generation" demonstration program under the Homeless Demonstration Program and evaluated by ETA During FY 1991, ETA provided $8.7 million to support this program.
Research and demonstration activities during PY 1990 were concerned with a wide range of workforce-related issues, and in several cases, projects were sponsored jointly with at least one other Federal agency.
Three new major demonstrations, co-sponsored by ETA and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), got underway during the July 1990-June 1991 period.
One involved a five-State project on the feasibility and effectiveness of linking child support enforcement with employment services for noncustodial parents (mostly fathers).
The goal was to improve the well-being of children and their families.
Another joint initiative was testing a variety of approaches to develop systematic linkages between DOL's job training and employment service delivery system and HHS's drug and alcohol treatment program and facilities.
The effort was designed to enhance the rehabilitation process by providing the target population with the full range of services-- using a case management approach-- required for successful transition to stable employment.
The purpose of the third new joint-HHS project was to improve the employability of alienated and criminally at-risk youth by providing alternatives to incarceration through specific interventions, including training and linkages with other available resources.
There were several other developments in programs for youth during the 12-month period.
A major effort got underway to collect, organize, and analyze interdisciplinary information on effective means to assist at-risk youth and others who without intervention will be unable to compete successfully in the labor market.
The knowledge acquired was translated into practical approaches that can be used by youth training and employment practitioners.
Major research issues for the project's first year included topics related to programs, services, and techniques, as well as the governance and management of youth programs.
Eight school-to-work demonstrations began with the common goals of keeping students in school through graduation and providing them with marketable skills after graduation.
Projects varied from those that provide work experience in a variety of occupations to those that offer technical experience in particular occupational areas (electronics, medical technician tasks), and/or technical education leading to higher education in post-high school studies.
Another new school-to-work demonstration project was aimed at helping disabled students to make the transition to the workplace.
The first year analysis of the Youth Opportunities Unlimited (YOU) initiative resulted in the recommendation of a second year of funding, generated a set of new priorities, and pointed out areas needing change and/or improvement to attain initial goals of the model program.
The seven YOU projects provide intensive comprehensive training, employment, and related services to youth in high poverty target areas in six cities and one rural area.
The primary goals were to achieve substantial gains in the rate of high school completions and significant declines in teen pregnancy, crime, and substance abuse.
Ongoing youth projects that received ETA support for another year were: the New Chance demonstration, co-funded with a number of private foundations, which provided economically disadvantaged teen parents with comprehensive and intensive services, including parenting skills and literacy training; a school-to-jobs project for 9 to 12 high school students; and the Cities-in-School (CIS) program bringing together representatives of local governments, schools, and the private sector in an effort to coordinate staff and financial resources and thus improve dropout prevention programs.
CIS was supported by private business, foundations, individuals, and the Departments of Justice, Education, Commerce, and HHS, as well as DOL.
Along with the Departments of Education and HHS, DOL provided funds for the National Center of Adult Literacy, located at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
Funded for a period of up to five years, NCAL was charged with improving the quality of literacy and basic skills services by conducting basic and applied research and dissemination activities.
The sponsors agreed to a basic core of research activities, to be augmented each subsequent year.
Activities during the first year focused on participation and service delivery, learning and instruction, and planning and policy development.
Under another literacy project supported by ETA, the Educational Testing Service (ETS) surveyed JTPA and UI/ES program participants to profile their workplace literacy levels and created a literacy test instrument to evaluate the literacy of individual members of these client populations.
ETS assessed the feasibility of implementing the individually administered test instrument in local JTPA, UI, and ES offices.
As part of a continuing policy review of the use of the GATB in State employment service offices, ETA commissioned three papers by testing experts.
An in-depth study examined how the unprecedented changes taking place in the national economy affected workers in four representative States.
It identified specific employment and training issues associated with the new economic era and provided suggestions for meeting the extraordinary demands of a new kind of workplace.
The study found that people's attitudes toward the value of education and technological change strongly affected the potential for development of workforce skills needed for positive economic change.
A survey looked at the usefulness of available labor market information (LMI) for State and local public agencies' employment and training planning needs, as well as those of employers, unions, and economic developers.
According to the survey results, individuals familiar with LMI generally found the resources provided useful in their planning.
Results of a third project represented a multi-agency response to the problems of recruiting and retaining women in the highway construction crafts.
ETA and the Women's Bureau joined the Department of Transportation to develop a guide for State highway agencies to use in assisting highway construction contractors in employing women.
Two other completed studies resulted in publications that received wide distribution.
America and the New Economy discussed a wide range of evolving forces that will affect industries, workers, and their occupations and the standing of the United States in competitive world markets.
Displaced Workers, 1985-89, produced in cooperation with the Bureau of Labor Statistics, reported that displacement affected fewer workers during the study period than it did in the previous five-year period, which included the recessions of 1980 and 1981-82.
However, the workers displaced represented a wider range of industries and occupations than did those displaced earlier in the decade.
Case studies of dislocated worker projects.
Ten projects cited as exemplary by state and regional offices were examined to identify features critical to successful dislocated worker projects.
The features identified as critical included flexibility in program design and implementation, quality of staff, coordination and linkages, early intervention, and labor-management cooperation.
A study of the net impact on participants' earnings and employment of a dislocated worker project in St. Louis.
The study found that impacts on earnings were positive during the first year after project exit.
Participants who received the most intensive services (classroom or on-thejob training) showed the greatest positive impacts the first year after reemployment.
Implementation of the Economic Dislocation and Worker Ad- justment Assistance Act (EDWAA).
Evaluators reported that during the first year of EDWAA, considerable progress was made in fur- thering the objectives of the law.
Specifically, services were available statewide in all States.
Areas where change is needed were also identified.
Job training for the homeless.
The study looked at the first year activities of the Job Training for the Homeless Demonstration Program.
Among other things, the evaluation pointed up the need for a diversified and coordinated approach to serving the homeless population.
Youth employment competency (YEC) programs operated by SDAs under JTPA Title II-A.
The study, which employed written surveys and on-site visits, focused on both exemplary YEC practices and prevalent problems.
In addition to the final report, the project was to produce a technical assistance guide.
Seven new studies were initiated during the period.
JTPA Title IV Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Program.
The overall objective of the study was to determine the nature and quality of training being provided by MSFW programs.
The evaluation produced a detailed description of program design, administration, and operations, as well as an assessment of the effectiveness and quality of program services.
School-to-Work Transition Demonstration.
The evaluation described and documented the planning, implementation, and outcomes of the six individual school-to-work projects that comprise the demonstration and the program as a whole; assess the effectiveness, utility and replicabilty of each program model; and disseminate information for use by other sites on effective and replicable projects.
Multi-State Job Bank Pilot Program.
ETA conducted a one-year evaluation of this innovative approach to test the feasibility of allowing jobseekers and employers to direct their own labor exchange through computer technology.
The evaluation was to measure the impact and effectiveness of the new technology, procedures, and levels of interstate cooperation on Employment Service activities and operations in six States.
Best assessment practices used in JTPA Title II-A programs.
The 30-month study, which also focused on case management and contracting practices aimed at encouraging service to the hard-to-serve, used written surveys and on-site visits to produce a technical assistance guide as well as a report.
EDWAA Farmer/Rancher Demonstration.
Four States received funds to conduct demonstration projects serving dislocated farmers, farmworkers, farm families, and ranchers.
The new evaluation project was designed to determine the factors that contribute to or impede the success of programs serving these groups.
EDWAA Job Creation Demonstration.
The initiative was to demonstrate the effectiveness of nonprofit community development corporations in creating employment and entrepreneurial opportunities for dislocated workers in cooperation with EDWAA sub-State grantees.
The project operated at six sites.
Terminee follow-up.
The project was initiated to provide intensive technical assistance in conducting required Title II-A/III terminee follow-up at 10 sites identified by ETA regional offices.
The project produced a technical assistance guide.
ETA continued its implementation of a major social experiment measuring the net impact of JTPA Title II-A services on participants in 16 SDAs.
During PY 1990, evaluators completed the 18-month follow-up survey of all persons who took part in the study.
The six-year study, which began in PY 1987, focused on the labor market experience of persons served by JTPA and included random selection of participants as part of its experimental design.
The agency continued to fund the Job Training Quarterly Survey, which monitored characteristics, program experience, and other data pertaining to JTPA participants on an ongoing basis.
Strengthening the capacity of the Federal education and training system to meet current and future needs of the workforce was a major focus of ETA's policy and planning activities in PY 1990.
ETA cooperated with the Departments of Education and HHS in sponsoring a conference on coordinating education and training for a skilled workforce.
The conference focused on the need for a skilled workforce to meet new challenges in the workplace and an accountable and coherent delivery system.
ETA also worked with Education and HHS on initial efforts to establish the National Institute for Literacy.
The institute, authorized by the National Literacy Act of 1991, was the focal point for Federal technical assistance and research in the literacy area, including workplace literacy.
The Literacy Act also authorized the National Workplace Literacy Assistance Collaborative, sponsored by the Department.
The collaborative operated through local business-led affiliates and offered technical assistance and information resources to help small and medium-sized firms and labor organizations upgrade workers' skills, and improve workplace performance.
ETA provided support to the Job Training 2000 working group chaired by the Secretary of Labor and organized by the Domestic Policy Council and the Council on Competitiveness to consider the future direction of the Federally-supported employment and training system.
The agency prepared for the working group a summary and analysis of 45 Federal programs providing education and training services.
Staff worked with Congressional members and staff on legislation designed to improve the delivery of services to hardto-serve youth and adults.
House but was not enacted during the 102nd Congress.
Revised amendments were proposed in 1991 that would target JTPA programs to those most in need or at-risk, enhance the quality of jTPA services, strengthen accountability, and promote coordination of human resources programs serving the disadvantaged.
The revised legislation would also establish a year-round youth program of education, training, and work experience.
ETA officials also participated in numerous Congressional oversight and legislative hearings on such subjects as unemployment compensation, the changing nature of the workforce, programs for the older workforce, migrant worker education, job training for youth, immigration issues, the use of performance standards in human resource programs, and adjustment assistance to dislocated workers in anticipation of a North American Free Trade Agreement.
A new series of publications that documented results of ETA's research and evaluation studies was initiated.
The first four publications in the Research and Evaluation Report Series appeared during PY 1990.
They were: Improving the Quality of Training Under JTPA, JTPA Staffing and Staff Training at the State and SDA Levels, An Assessment of the JTPA Role in State and Local Coordination, and Practical Guidance for Strengthening Private Industry Councils.
Another publication issued during the period, A Guide to High School Redirection, related the experience of an alternative high school in Brooklyn New York.
As part of its plan to improve labor market efficiency, the Department requested that ETA review options for improving the Employment Service (ES).
Whether or not the Nation receives an adequate return for the $800 million spent each year by the ES.
In March 1991, the Secretary concurred with an administrative approach to pursue ES reform.
The objectives of the ES initiative were to improve Federal and State relations, increase Federal and State communications, and increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the ES.
The Office of Management and Budget approved revisions to the ES reporting system.
Further, agreement was reached to develop ES performance standards, establish an ES performance award system similar to the JTPA award program, host information exchange forums and ES demonstrations, and provide greater ES technical assistance to the States.
ES continued to serve the immediate needs of employers and jobseekers in PY 1990.
It registered 19.2 million applicants and provided some reportable service to 10.4 million.
More than 3.2 million applicants were placed in jobs or obtained employment after receiving services.
Labor-exchange expenditures totaled $690.8 million.
ES continued its efforts to reach out to the employer community during PY 1990, renewing a combined grant (ETA and the Assistant Secretary for Veterans'Employment and Training) to the Employers'National Job Service Committee.
As an employer organization, the committee told employers about the advantages of using the public employment service to hire and train disadvantaged workers, at-risk youth, veterans, and disabled persons.
In addition, it worked to improve coordination with JTPA and its Private Industry Councils.
The participation of SESAs in the Interstate Job Bank (IJB) during PY 1990 increased and improved.
Thirty States merged the IJB weekly or updated it daily into their on-line computerized job listings so it was readily available in all their local employment offices with terminals.
At least 20 SESAs had a selfservice job search system available for jobseekers to search for their own jobs.
The number of job listings provided by States for the IJB increased about five percent.
This listing of hard-to-fill jobs reached 36 SESA local offices weekly on microfiche and 17 SESAs daily using telecommunications.
The Multi-State Job Bank Project (MSJB), using support from the IJB Center, tested the feasibility of self-directed labor exchanges between jobseekers and employers.
The user friendliness of the self-search computer program, known as Automated Labor Exchange (ALEX), improved.
Virginia and Maryland were piloting an "Employer-Access" system that allowed employers to enter job orders into the ES job order system and select job applicants for interviews.
The project was successful in expanding services to veterans in selected locations.
Information on the project's progress was shared with interested States, regions, and professional associations.
An evaluation contractor, reviewing project activities, was to issue a report in 1992.
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act, the Department of Labor, through USES, was responsible for certifying that the use of certain categories of foreign workers would not adversely affect the job opportunities, wages, and working conditions of U.S. workers.
Such certification was required by the Immigration and Naturalization Service as a condition for issuance of visas.)
In FY 1991, 45,206 applications for permanent and temporary labor certifications for non-agricultural jobs were approved, and 21,553 temporary agricultural jobs were certified to be filled by non-immigrant foreign workers.
ETA continued the comprehensive review of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) and the occupational analysis system which produces it.
The intent of the review was to promote labor market efficiency by ensuring that the DOT responds to the diverse needs of the occupational information user community, with particular attention to the needs of employers, the education community, and the training community--both public and private.
The DOT Review Initiative was developed as part of the Department's Workforce Quality Agenda to ensure that the American workforce has the skills to meet the challenges of the 1990s and beyond.
A formal Federal advisory panel conducted a user survey and explores new methods of collecting, analyzing, organizing, publishing and disseminating occupational information.
In August 1990, a concept paper outlining the approach to be used in the DOT review was published in the "Federal Register."
In December 1990, key issues raised by the initial public response were summarized.
In April 1991, the project produced a working paper, "The Changing World of Work: Implications for the DOT Review Initiative," and developed an "APDOT Management Report" that outlines broad options and specifies next steps.
ETA also contracted with the International Labour Organization to conduct research on equivalent labor market tools currently used or under development by economic competitor nations including: Australia, France, Germany, Japan, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
ETA also contracted with a consultant to produce a report on the Canadian system.
A revised edition of the "Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 4th Edition" (DOT) was published in September 1991 and put on sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office.
The DOT contained occupational titles, codes, occupational descriptions, and estimates of physical demands, amount of general education, and specific training required for 12,741 occupations.
All entries in the revised edition were reviewed; about 20 percent of the occupations were new or significantly changed since the previous edition.
Significant changes in format made the DOT easier to use.
The DOT, generally considered the most comprehensive single source of information about occupations as evidenced by a sale of some 300,000 copies of the 4th edition, was originally used mainly in matching people and jobs.
The primary goal of the cooperative Federal-State Occupational Analysis (OA) program was to maintain, update, and improve the multi-purpose database and resultant publications, such as the DOT, the "Guide for Occupational Exploration," "Selected Characteristics of Occupations in the DOT," and the "Handbook for Analyzing Jobs."
Data collection, analysis, and synthesis were accomplished by five Occupational Analysis Field Centers, funded by reimbursable grants in North Carolina, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri and Utah.
The lead field center (North Carolina) coordinated, monitored, evaluated and synthesized the work of the other field centers and assisted ES in managing the program.
The National Academy of Sciences report, "Fairness in Employment Testing: Validity Generalization, Minority Issues, and the General Aptitude Test Battery," raised a number of issues and made recommendations for the improvement of the General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB).
A work group composed of ETA staff, SESA administrators, and a psychologist from EEOC analyzed the report, as did an outside contractor, the American Institute for Research.
Based on these analyses, a GATB Research Plan was formulated and published for public comment in the "Federal Register" on July 24, 1990, as a part of the proposed policy on the use of the GATB.
No comments were received opposing or suggesting substantive changes in the plan.
Improved validation methods and an accelerated validation process.
Reduced GATB score differences among racial/ethnic groups to the extent possible.
Additional alternate forms of the GATB.
Reduced susceptibility to coaching.
Reduced speed, if possible.
Standards for the physical security of testing material.
New norms.
Testing staff worked on some aspects of these projects for some time.
In order to properly carry out this plan, an additional $1 million state grants funding was requested and received in the FY 1991 appropriation.
Cooperative agreements with the Test Development Field Centers and their host organizations in North Carolina and California were implemented for the use of the additional funds.
3) review of research plans, procedures, and work products by outside experts.
3) professional credibility of the procedure and results by an independent outside review by nationally recognized experts.
This trend continued in 1991.
In calendar year 1990, 20.2 million initial claims were filed with State employment security agencies, resulting in the payment of $18.1 billion in benefits for 116.0 million weeks of unemployment.
The average weekly payment for total unemployment was approximately $153.
State unemployment tax revenues totaled $14.8 billion.
Because of increasing outlays, State trust fund balances were reduced in FY 1991 to $34.8 billion as of June 30, 1991.
This represented a reduction of $4.1 billion from the previous year.
As of November 27, 1991, three States had outstanding loans, two having borrowed during 1991 and the other during the early 1980s.
ETA continued quality unemployment insurance (UI) initiatives during FY 1990 to improve the integrity of the program and to test alternative and innovative ways to accelerate and smooth the transition to reemployment for UI recipients.
The Department of Labor had one overriding goal for the Quality Control (QC) program: to ensure that the UI program operates with the highest degree of accuracy and timeliness attainable within the administrative resources available.
In calendar years 1988, 1989 and 1990 the weighted average benefit overpayment error rate for the UI system dropped from 10.1 to 8.8 to 8.0 percent, respectively.
The UI benefit payment accuracy rates for this period were provided to the general public with the release of individual State reports, and the Department of Labor distributed a compendium of State results to more than 100 interested parties.
Providing appropriate software.
Encouraging States to conduct program-improvement studies to identify problems, pinpoint corrective action, and test alternatives before statewide implementation.
Half of the States had undertaken such studies.
Also during the reporting period, UI actively pursued the design of Revenue Quality Control.
Because of the complexity of UI tax systems, four design modules were developed.
The first module, "Core RQC," pilot-tested during FY 1991- 92, examined the accuracy, timeliness and completeness with which SESAs conduct their internal tax operations.
It was scheduled for voluntary implementation in FY 1993.
A design for the second, Benefit Charging, which was to build on the Benefits QC program, was pilot-tested in FY 1991.
The two remaining modules, Employer Compliance and Reports Validation, were still in the design stage.
In the mid-1980s, the Department of Labor initiated a series of demonstration projects designed to use the UI system to hasten the return to work of UI recipients who are dislocated workers.
To identify UI claimants, primarily dislocated workers, who need reemployment services early in their spells of unemployment.
To improve linkages between UI and other service providers--including ES, JTPA, and economic development agencies--to create effective delivery systems for dislocated workers.
Using UI claims data, the project was successful in identifying UI claimants who were dislocated workers and in referring these workers to services by their fifth week of unemployment.
Closely coordinated early intervention strategy linking UI, ES, and JTPA programs was effective in accelerating reemployment of the targeted claimants.
Four additional reemployment demonstration projects began.
Two of these projects tested variations of the reemployment bonus option first tested in New Jersey, and the other projects tested the viability of self-employment as a reemployment option for UI recipients who were interested in starting their own businesses.
The Department of Labor therefore proceeded with two additional demonstration projects testing variations of that option.
Pennsylvania and Washington were selected as sites.
To determine the optimum bonus offer, the projects were designed to test differing bonus amounts and differing periods of time in which to qualify for a bonus.
The results from Washington showed that the project offered reemployment bonuses to 14,000 UI claimants and paid 1,815 bonuses, an average of $567 per payment.
The Pennsylvania results showed that bonuses were offered to 10,060 claimants and 773 claimants received bonuses, an average of $926 per payment.
The final reports were scheduled for the end of 1991.
The Department explored the viability of self-employment as a reemployment option for some portion of the UI recipient population.
This option was based on self-employment programs first tried in Western Europe for unemployed workers.
The Massachusetts Self-Employment Demonstration Project began the second year of operation at seven locations in April 1991.
It provided participants with bi-weekly payments equal to their regular UI benefits, thus giving them an income stream while they are planning and establishing their own businesses.
As of September 1991, 263 participants had been enrolled in the project and were receiving bi-weekly self-employment allowance payments averaging $545 per payment.
Project operations were to continue for three years, with a four-to-ten month participant enrollment period each year.
Interim reports on these projects were scheduled for the end of 1991.
The Performance Measurement Review (PMR) Project began in 1989 to ensure that the Secretary of Labor's statutory responsibilities for the administration and oversight of the UI program were being carried out effectively.
The goal of the project is to foster continuous improvement in both the efficiency and effectiveness of the UI system, relying on statistically valid data.
The result is to be an integrated oversight system useful to the Department in assessing performance in critical UI functions and the States in managing their UI program.
During 1991, work was directed to the design of the performance measurement system.
Identifying legal responsibilities which require performance measurement.
Identifying alternative performance measures for benefits, non-monetary determinations, appeals and benefit payment control.
Preparing a design for the field test.
Changes in the oversight system were made on a phased in basis.
State agencies had the opportunity to provide input on the proposed performance measures and several State UI agencies participated in a field test of the proposed measures.
ETA continued compliance monitoring of JTPA, the Wagner-Peyser Act (the public employment service), and Trade Act activities.
For JTPA activities, reviews covered procurement systems, on-the-job training programs and Summer Youth Employment and Training Programs.
In addition, there were implementation/status reviews of EDWAA and the national reserve projects for dislocated workers.
For Wagner-Peyser programs, the monitoring consisted primarily of compliance reviews of ES cost-reimbursable grants.
Trade adjustment assistance programs operating under the Trade Act were monitored by technical assistance activities, both new reviews and follow-up of previous reviews, and new TAA program directives.
ETA made significant progress on its major initiative to replace the existing grants and contracts accounting system with a more comprehensive and user-friendly PC-based network system.
This system was designed to serve all DOL agencies responsible for grants and contracts.
In-depth financial management reviews of seven ETA national office grantees and two JTPA state grantees were conducted.
These reviews were limited to grantees with perceived severe financial weaknesses.
There was active participation in the development and/or implementation of a number of new legislative and regulatory initiatives.
Some of these included a government-wide task force to revise Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circulars A-102 and A-110, a government-wide task force to implement the Cash Management Improvement Act, and implementation of M account legislation.
Corrective action was taken to resolve a number of issues raised by the Office of Inspector General (OIG) and the General Accounting Office (GAO) in resolving M account issues; developing a State Employment Security Agency real property inventory and tracking system; implementing a Federal Employee Compensation accounting system; and reconciling the ETA accounting system with the new Departmental system.
Also in FY 1991, ETA made final determinations of 325 audits and similar reports, resolving a total of $18,408,060 in questioned costs.
As a result, debts totaling $9,398,725 were established for collection action.
Appeals for Judicial or Secretarial review were filed on 27 of the FY 1991 final determinations, for a total of 127 cases under appeal at the close of the fiscal year.
Resolution of 397 auditors' administrative recommendations occurred; and many administrative recommendations that were carried forward from prior years were implemented by the grantees and contractors.
With respect to internal accounting for terminated grants and contracts, ETA closed the financial accounts of 359 ETA grants and contracts.
These activities facilitated the recovery of $2,545,741.
On-site program and fiscal reviews were conducted independently of program office activities on a sample of 22 national office programs.
These reviews focused on program operations and financial systems.
Issues of concern included misclassification of costs, lack of cost-allocation plans, inadequate documentation for verification of participant eligibility, and failure to follow government travel regulations.
The grantees involved were notified of the findings and asked to take corrective action.
In addition, the Division of Special Review and Internal Control conducted 10 internal control reviews, surveys and management reviews to carry out ETA responsibilities under the Federal Managers'Financial Integrity Act.
Also, a total of 1,173 pre-award clearance reviews were completed on potential ETA contractors/grantees; and 16 investigations, either internal or external, were conducted to determine compliance with applicable legislative and regulatory requirements.
Approximately 328 incidents of alleged fraud, abuse, or other criminal activity were reported through ETA Incident Reports or the General Accounting Office/Office of Inspector General hotline system.
Where appropriate, corrective action was initiated.
ETA collected approximately $6.5 million in cash and UI Trust Fund transfers for debts established through the audit resolution and closeout process.
Approximately 40 percent of these collections in FY 1991 related to JTPA program debts.
The agency referred to the Department of Justice 18 delinquent debt cases which the agency had been unsuccessful in collecting through the administrative process.
Approximately $2.2 million in outstanding receivables were associated with the 18 cases.
The Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS) released its first report, which outlined the skills and skill levels necessary for entry level work in today's economy, at a news conference July 2, 1991.
Dissemination of the report and national and regional briefings to business political, educational, community leaders and public interest groups.
Development and dissemination of "A Blueprint for Action," a SCANS handbook of practical, hand-on suggestions to local communities on incorporating SCANS skills into local schools and workplace training programs.
Support of national business, education and labor groups to disseminate the report and implement it at the grassroots level.
Establishment of a SCANS hotline, 1-800-788-SKILL, to handle requests for the report and information on implementing it.
Development of a SCANS Resource Center to provide materials on exemplary programs.
The Office of Public Affairs offered support to all of the ETA program offices through a broad spectrum of activities.
In addition to working with major media throughout the year on every aspect of ETA, public affairs fielded hundreds of media calls on the GATB issue, jobs in Kuwait, Unemployment Insurance in general and the emergency extended benefits bill in particular.
To help JTPA field personnel in planning and conducting the Summer Jobs Program, the public affairs office prepared a technical assistance booklet entitled, "Summer's Here! Kids Need Jobs."
It contained suggested special activities or events, sample news releases, radio spots, telethon tips, help in finding a job, and models of successful programs.
Last year's two video PSAs were updated and made available to the field.
Programs, Public Affairs helped coordinate the fourth annual JTPA Presidential Awards, assisting with the production of the program booklet and other materials, and media coverage for the awards ceremony.
A JTPA brochure entitled, "This is JTPA," was produced for the National Alliance of Business annual conference.
Public affairs coordinated an exhibit that provided hundreds of conferees with ETA materials and information about ETA programs.
Public Affairs continued working closely with Job Corps in its major recruitment campaign to attract more youth, particularly young women.
News releases, transit ads and other visuals were coordinated through this office, as well as several major media stories.
Tips for Finding the Right Job," a booklet designed to assist jobseekers, was prepared in coordination with the ES office.
Public Affairs assisted in the production of brochures on mentoring and the older worker program.
A new publication, "Job Directions," and an accompanying poster of the same name were prepared by public affairs.
The eight-page booklet was a guide for persons who may be entering or re-entering the job market and need direction.
Dissemination to the field was to take place in December 1991.
Insurance issues after all media calls regarding initial claims were directed to that office.
Public Affairs oversaw and assisted in the development and production of the SCANS original report, Blueprint and Secretary's flyer.
The office also took the lead in developing a video, with expected delivery date in December 1991.
The office initiated a syndicated feature series through News USA to reach greater audiences.
The first article promoted "Tips for Finding the Right Job."
As of November 1991, the release generated 128 clippings from newspapers around the country, reaching an estimated 5.1 million readers.
This effort was to be continued in 1992, featuring SCANS, WIST and Job Directions.
In Fiscal Year 1991, the Bureau of Labor Statistics continued to improve the quality of the national economic indicators and other essential statistics on employment, prices, compensation, working conditions, productivity, and technology.
Completed the third year of an important nationwide initiative to improve the statistical basis for establishment surveys.
Continued work on a comprehensive multiyear revision of the Current Population Survey, which is being conducted in cooperation with the Bureau of the Census.
Provided numerous foreign countries with consultation on the U.S. statistical system and the Bureau's survey procedures and techniques.
Continued a long-term revision process to substantially improve International Price data, resampled key industries for the Producer Price Index program, and further accelerated the monthly release schedule for the Consumer Price Index.
Published results of a first-time survey on employee benefit plan provisions in small private establishments.
Began developmental work to supply data for locality pay adjustments specified by the Federal Employees Pay Comparability Act of 1990.
Published employer cost data for various establishment sizes and for State and local governments.
Designed and tested a new statistical system for measuring occupational injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
Developed projections for economic growth, industry output and employment, occupational employment, and the labor force to the year 2005.
The Bureau continued to enhance its reputation as a leader in the design, execution, and analysis of statistical surveys of employment and unemployment.
Statistical agencies in other nations sought the Bureau's technical assistance.
Experts from the Bureau's Employment and Unemployment Statistics program provided advice to statistical agencies in Eastern Europe as well as in the western hemisphere.
For example, Bureàu staff assisted the Central Statistical Agency of Poland on technical aspects of maintaining business establishment registers in a transitional economy; the staff also helped the Hungarian statistical office prepare for its first labor force survey in the post-Communist era.
In addition, Bureau staff assisted the Mexican National Institute of Statistics in upgrading its standards for statistical surveys of employment and unemployment.
In this country, the economic slowdown which began in 1990 and dominated the economic scene in 1991 renewed the attention of policymakers and the public on the Bureau's employment and unemployment statistics, which were compiled, analyzed, and issued to the public on a monthly basis, along with various special studies of topical interest.
Another important Bureau activity during the year involved testimony before the independent panel which is considering revising the Standard Occupational Classification system used in the Dictionary of Occupational Titles.
The Bureau also provided a chairperson for an Office of Management and Budget subcommittee which is responsible for assuring consistency among the Standard Industrial Codes assigned by various agencies.
Establishment of the inter-agency research program mandated by the Foreign Direct Investment and Data Improvements Act of 1990.
The initial project in this program involved matching establishment data from the Covered Employment and Wages file with data on foreign-owned investments from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
As a result, information was made available on the industrial structure and employment patterns of foreign-owned businesses in the United States.
Contribution to a report identifying labor market areas that may be adversely affected by Defense Department spending cutbacks, in cooperation with the Department of Defense.
The Bureau continued to apply rapidly improving technology to its Employment and Unemployment Statistics programs.
One such application involved redesign of the Current Population Survey (CPS) questionnaire.
As part of the once-a-decade opportunity to implement enhancements to this important source of labor force data based on household interviews, the redesign project used computer-assisted technology to more than double the amount of information obtained in the CPS interview while actually reducing the average response time burden on those interviewed.
The project now turns to field testing through a large-scale overlap survey in 1992 and 1993, followed by implementation of the new sample and questionnaire in January 1994.
Development of a micro-computer based system which facilitates timely editing and correction of microdata in the Current Employment Statistics program.
Establishment of a new data collection center in Atlanta, which houses Computer Assisted Telephone Interview (CATI) workstations designed to improve the timeliness and quality of data collected from business establishments.
Completion of a computer-assisted Standard Industrial Classification coding system.The system was issued to the State Employment Security Agencies that are BLS partners in the Federal/State cooperative statistical program.
Development of programs to enable in-house microcomputer generation of photo-ready tables of CPS data for the monthly news release on the Employment Situation.
The new system provides enhanced data security, improved timeliness, and lower costs than the previous approach, which involved mainframe computers and a complex inter-agency workflow.
The Bureau continued to focus on improving the quality, timeliness, and analysis of price information about the United States economy.
For the second year in a row, the Bureau reduced two days from the monthly publication schedule for the Consumer Price Index.
The Producer Price Index program introduced completely resampled industries for electricity and natural gas.
The initiative resulted in comprehensive coverage of these two areas.
The International Price program entered the third year of its first major revision.
As a result of the revision, the program will produce monthly, rather than quarterly data.
The Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES) program began testing a new Diary Survey questionnaire in an effort to simplify the questionnaire's use by respondents and improve expenditure estimates.
The staff also conducted an extensive survey of CES data users.
The Bureau published a variety of information on collective bargaining and labor-management relations, including data on the size of major collective bargaining settlements, major work stoppages, labor organization membership, and scheduled bargaining activity.
The monthly periodical, Current Wage Developments, was renamed Compensation and Working Conditions to reflect its expanded scope and revised format.
The Employment Cost Index (ECI) program began publishing employer costs for employee compensation by establishment employment size.
An analysis of these data appeared in a Compensation and Working Conditions article.
In addition, the Bureau began issuing several ECI data series on a seasonally adjusted basis.
BLS also completed the first phase of joint data collection for an integrated ECI and Employee Benefits Survey program and published the first combined survey data for employee benefit plan provisions in small establishments.
Considerable effort was devoted to developmental work for design of a new survey to supply data needed for locality pay adjustments under the Federal Employees Pay Comparability Act of 1990.
This survey will provide greatly expanded data on wages by occupation and geographic area for use in setting the pay of Federal workers.
After successfully completing two small pilot tests, the Bureau, in cooperation with some 30 States, embarked on a full-scale test of a census approach to counting and summarizing the characteristics of all fatal occupational injuries.
Results of the earlier tests were presented in two Monthly Labor Review articles.
Equally important, work continued to redesign the survey of nonfatal injuries and illnesses; the revised survey will shed additional light on the workers most at risk for serious injuries and illnesses and on the risks themselves.
The Bureau published a news release, a summary report, and a comprehensive bulletin, all providing nationwide results of the latest Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses.
To meet demand for local data on injuries and illnesses, Bureau staff processed and extracted information on many States and territories from the Annual Survey and from the Bureau's Supplementary Data System.
BLS staff also prepared several additional reports, including a first-time study on uses of various statistical measures of disabling (lost worktime) injuries and an article which focused on the injury and illness experience of teenagers and women in eating and drinking places.
Productivity trends in the United States continued to attract the attention of business and government leaders, as well as economists and thoughtful citizens.
Productivity growth provides the foundation on which American businesses and workers have built a record of steady improvements in living standards and competitiveness in world markets.
BLS responded to the need for timely and accurate information by continuing to extend and refine its measures of productivity and costs.
The Bureau improved several multifactor productivity measures, including modifying weights for capital and labor inputs to reflect more accurately the likely effects of taxation, initiating joint computation of capital rates of return for industries with significant vertical integration, and incorporating results of Commerce Department research on industry output.
The Bureau issued by the end of Fiscal Year 1991 a total of 174 separate productivity measures in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communications, and service sectors of the economy, including a new measure for frozen fruits and vegetables.
BLS updated productivity measures for the Federal Government.
These measures included 23 years of historical data for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies, representing 64 percent of the Federal civilian workforce.
BLS also updated productivity measures for several State and local government activities.
In response to continued public interest, the Bureau assessed the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
Bureau staff completed reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years for hospitals, coal mining, pharmaceuticals, and eating and drinking places.
A preliminary report on the steel industry, including survey data and case studies, also was prepared.
The Bureau published a resource guide, BLS Publications on Productivity and Technology, and completed several productivity research projects.
One of these projects identified the separate effects of education and experience on productivity.
Another examined the impact of computers and other high-tech equipment on productivity trends and on capital measures.
A new study of movements of productivity and cost measures during business cycles also was completed.
In order to evaluate or improve its various productivity measures, the Bureau launched several new research efforts.
One study examines effects of private research and development on productivity by exploring the benefits accruing to industries that purchase capital goods or materials which have been improved by research and development in other industries.
Another new research project examines effects on productivity measures of possible increasing returns to scale, capacity utilization, and markup pricing.
In yet another new effort, a working group began addressing conceptual issues in the measurement of service sector output.
In the international area, BLS updated comparative trend measures of manufacturing labor productivity and unit labor costs in 12 industrial countries (including information for selected component industries in five countries), plus unit labor costs for Korea and Taiwan.
The Bureau also updated measures of comparative levels of hourly compensation costs in 30 countries or areas for total manufacturing and 39 component manufacturing industries, as well as the series on international comparisons of the labor force and unemployment in 10 industrial countries.
These measures are used to assess U.S. economic performance relative to other industrial countries and to provide insights into the changing competitive position of U.S. manufacturers.
The Bureau provided substantial assistance to statisticians in Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia in setting up statistical systems appropriate for market economies.
Twelve BLS staff traveled to these three countries for consultations in 1991.
BLS also initiated a program of technical cooperation and exchange of labor statistics data with Mexico.
As part of this program, a BLS team of experts traveled to Mexico to meet with representatives of the Secretariat of Labor and Social Welfare and the National Institute of Statistics, Geography, and Information.
At the meeting, participants discussed ways to improve cooperation in labor statistics, including training and information exchanges.
In addition, two economists from the Mexican Secretariat of Labor and Social Welfare attended a BLS seminar on Analysis of Labor Statistics.
In summary, the Bureau conducted a total of 10 labor statistics seminars of three to eight weeks duration in Washington, D.C., for some 123 participants from 32 countries.
BLS also conducted special study programs of varying lengths for 16 participants from 10 different countries.
During the year, a total of 275 foreign visitors from more than 40 countries traveled to Washington to consult with BLS experts on a wide range of topics.
In addition, Bureau staff provided on-site technical assistance in 20 different countries.
Analytical work focused on developing projections of the labor force, economic growth, industry output and employment, and occupational employment to the year 2005.
Bureau staff also devoted extensive efforts toward preparation of the 1992-93.
The Occupational Outlook Quarterly featured articles on a ranking of earnings by occupation and on trends in self-employment by industry and occupation through the 1980's.
Other articles in the Quarterly examined emerging careers, high-earnings occupations that do not require a four-year college degree, how to assess a job offer, and employment prospects for preschool teachers.
The Bureau published a Monthly Labor Review article which analyzed the impact on industry and occupational employment of alternative levels of defense expenditures.
Another article in the Review dealt with employment trends in the child care industry.
BLS also completed an extensive research effort on how to improve procedures for developing estimates of occupational job openings stemming from replacement needs and issued its findings in a report, Total and Net Separations: A Report on Recent Research.
Bureau staff prepared a pamphlet providing guidance information for dislocated workers.
The pamphlet, titled Getting Back to Work, was distributed to State employment service offices and dislocated worker programs throughout the country.
The National Longitudinal Surveys program completed an experiment using computer-assisted personal interviewing for the survey's youth component.
BLS staff presented preliminary results at two national conferences.
Analyses completed during the year appeared in several Monthly Labor Review articles.
In cooperation with other agencies, including the Pension Welfare Benefits Administration and the Women's Bureau, BLS began collecting pension plan descriptions for participants in the Mature Women's survey.
Analysis of data from a split-panel test of alternative questionnaires for the Current Population Survey led to development of a single alternative for comparative testing.
The new questionnaire was designed to improve the accuracy of the measurement process and expand the types of available labor force data.
Research on alternative telephone sample designs revealed that a more cost-effective method can be used to create the outlet sampling frame for the Consumer Price Index.
BLS fully implemented the sample design for the Department of Labor's drug testing program.
A member of the Bureau's research staff was elected as a Fellow of the American Statistical Association.
The Bureau significantly expanded the Local Area Network (LAN) in its regional offices, including taking the steps necessary to make regional LAN environments suitable for production work.
BLS increased the speed and data capacity of the Regional LAN Internetwork System by a factor of five without any increase in cost.
The Bureau also implemented a nationwide contract for on-site labor in the regions.
In the national office, LAN reliability improved by 34 percent during the year.
BLS began using a new LAN-based system for graphical data review and analysis in the Current Employment Statistics (CES) program.
The new system, called the Automated Review of Industry Employment Statistics (ARIES), enabled economists to inspect data graphically and in tabular form, to make necessary analytical adjustments, and to recompute estimates instantaneously.
ARIES runs on the Bureau's network of microcomputers and displays related establishment data as points on a two-dimensional graph, allowing analysts to select questionable data points for closer review.
The system eliminates the need for massive paper records and makes possible a more thorough and timely analysis of CES data.
As a major step toward downsizing certain mainframe applications, BLS adopted results from its LAN client-server research effort as its new network-based Database Management System.
In support of a United Nations effort, BLS coordinated collection of U.S. statistical agencies'user evaluations of microcomputer software.
BLS awarded major contracts for labor hours support, notebook computers, optical character recognition equipment, and workstation printers.
The Monthly Labor Review received a first place award in the National Association of Government Communicators'Blue Pencil Competition.
The Society for Technical Communication's Washington, D.C., chapter presented six awards to BLS publications.
Three of the prizes went to the Occupational Outlook Quarterly, two to the Monthly Labor Review, and one to the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
The Bureau began research for several important studies to analyze data assimilated from a number of BLS programs.
The Bureau continued to enhance its inquiries operation by issuing category codes for immediate access to specific messages on the BLS 24-Hour Current Data Hotline, an extensive series of recordings on current economic data and information sources.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) issued two final standards and three proposed rules designed to improve workplace safety and health in Fiscal Year 1991 (FY 1991).
These standards and rules ranged from stairways and ladders in construction operations and working with the lift-slab techniques to providing permissible workplace exposure limits for formaldehyde and examining the relationship between passive smoking and indoor air quality.
New Federal legislation increased maximum OSHA penalties sevenfold, and 14 of the 23 States with safety and health plans covering the public and private sectors enacted penalty legislation paralleling the Federal change.
The North Carolina State Plan, following the September 3 fire at the processing poultry plant in Hamlet, North Carolina, was reevaluated by the Secretary and the Congress.
OSHA reinstituted limited Federal enforcement in North Carolina effective in October 1991.
OSHA conducted 82,484 State and 42,113 Federal inspections in FY 1991, and detailed in a directive its procedures for conducting corporatewide settlement agreements.
OSHA also reported from 15 to 20 active corporate settlement agreements that covered responsibilities at more than 150 sites and established through its regional offices initiatives to foster employee participation and involvement.
OSHA's Criminal Enforcement Pilot Program was launched to determine the effectiveness of the procedure for expediting referrals in criminal cases.
OSHA coordinated the review of 26 egregious cases and proposed a total of $9.7 million in Federal penalties and $32.6 million in State penalties.
Understanding (MOU) with agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Agriculture.
The agency also conducted accident investigations and provided expert testimony to the Congress concerning enforcement activities.
During Fiscal Year 1991, OSHA's Directorates of Safety Standards and Health Standards Programs issued two final standards and three proposed rules.
A final rule for lift-slab construction (29 CFR 1926.705) was published on October 18, 1990.
A major accident involving a building under construction using the lift-slab technique was the impetus for the new rulemaking.
Final rules revising standards on the use of stairways and ladders in construction operations were published on November 14, 1990, (Subpart X, 29 CFR, Part 1926.1050 through 1926.1060).
These revisions focused on the principal hazards faced by construction workers and clarified earlier standards to provide employers with better guidance and flexibility in compliance.
On July 15, 1991, OSHA published a proposed standard on formaldehyde (29 CFR 1910.1048).
The proposal would lower the permissible exposure limit (PEL) from the existing limit of 1 ppm (parts per million of air) as an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA) to an 8-hour TWA of 0.75 ppm.
OSHA estimates that the changes would provide additional protection for 84,000 workers exposed to formaldehyde at levels between 1.0 ppm (the existing PEL) and 0.75 ppm (the proposed PEL).
On September 20, 1991, OSHA also published a Request for Information on Indoor Air Quality that integrated passive smoking and indoor air quality issues.
Numerous adverse health effects are associated with air contaminants, such as sick building syndrome, Legionnaires' disease, and passive exposure to tobacco smoke.
On September 18, 1991, OSHA reopened the cadmium docket to solicit new evidence and comments on the photodecomposition of cadmium sulfide (29 CFR 1910, [Table Z-2]).
The original proposal was published on February 6, 1990.
OSHA estimates that approximately 512,000 workers are exposed to cadmium in a wide variety of industries.
In addition to these completed actions, the Directorates of Health and Safety Standards Development continued ongoing work on a wide variety of regulatory actions that had been proposed in earlier fiscal years and were not yet completed at the end of the Fiscal Year 1991.
Developing a final rule to protect health care workers against bloodborne pathogens.
The final rule was scheduled for issuance in December 1991.
Extending the deadline for public comment to August 31,1991, on whether non-asbestiform materials pose the same health hazards as asbestos.
Holding public hearings in January 1991 on several proposed revisions of the asbestos standard that was issued on July 20, 1990.
The proposed revisions were occasioned by a decision of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia which, as a result of a lawsuit, remanded several provisions of the standard for OSHA to determine whether more protective provisions are available to reduce worker risk.
The postpublic hearing comment period ended April 26 and a briefing period was extended to July 24.
Holding public hearings in Washington, D.C., on January 15, 1991, and in New Orleans on February 20, 1991, on OSHA's proposed rule to regulate worker exposure to 1,3 Butadiene.
The deadlines for post-public hearing comments and briefs were extended to September 27 and October 28, 1991, from June and July 22, respectively.
February 8, 1991, to March 1, 1991, for the proposed rule on electric power generation, transmission, and distribution facilities.
Holding initial public hearings on February 5, 1991, in Washington, D.C., that were completed in Cincinnati on February 14 1991, on proposed rules that would develop procedures for accrediting training programs for hazardous waste operations.
The proposed rule was issued January 26, 1990.
Holding public hearings beginning on January 8, 1991, in Washington, D.C., ending on February 8, 1991, in Chicago on proposed standards for motor vehicle safety.
The proposed rule was issued in July 1990.
Publishing in the Federal Register on December 10, 1990, a request for more information on a proposed revision to the grain handling standard.
The final rule was published in December 1987.
Other standards development projects underway included continuing work to finalize standards on methods of compliance; 4,4,-Methylenedianiline; scaffords and fall protection in construction work; logging operations; walking and working surfaces; personal fall protection equipment; personal protective equipment; confined space; and process safety management.
Proposed standards in various stages of development included methylene chloride; glycol ethers; respiratory protection; permissible exposure limits for construction, maritime, and agriculture; lead, lockout, crane safety, and steel erection in construction; power industrial truck operator training; welding; and egonomic management programs.
Shipyard employment standards being reviewed prior to development of proposals included access and egress, welding, cutting and heating, personal protective equipment, and fall protection.
Continued to revise procedures for monitoring and evaluating State programs, based on comments from the General Accounting Office and the Department's Office of the Inspector General, as well as on OSHA's own experience under the current procedures.
Issued a directive that formalized OSHA's policy to involve the State plan States in the development of new and revised Federal safety and health standards.
Established procedures on how to provide information on the Federal standards development process and how to obtain States' input and participation.
Monitored State response to the new Federal legislation that increased OSHA penalties sevenfold.
Fourteen of the 23 States with plans covering both the private sector and State and local government enacted penalty legislation in response to the Federal change; New York, which covers only the public sector, enacted legislation for the first time providing penalties for failure-to-abate violations.
Applied for the second year a funding formula to determine the allocation among States of any funding increase above the cost-of-living level that the Congress added to the State plan grant budget ($2.0 million in FY 1991).
The formula was developed in 1986 for States that had developed larger programs when funding was more readily available and retained a disproportionate share of funds in later years as funds became more restricted.
Provided technical assistance to several State programs that experienced major accidents.
Refinery near Ferndale, Washington, OSHA sent a technical expert to assess the work site.
OSHA also sought public comment on an AFL-CIO petition to withdraw the approval of the North Carolina State plan.
To provide North Carolina with additional resources in the only manner available to OSHA at the time, OSHA reinstituted limited Federal enforcement in North Carolina effective October 1991.
Onsite safety and health consultation services provided by the States and funded by OSHA exceeded compliance requirements and encourage employers to find the best ways to ensure safe and healthful working conditions for their employees.
The consultation service is penalty-free and no citations are issued, but employers were required to take immediate action to eliminate worker exposure to imminent dangers and to correct serious hazards within a reasonable time.
In FY 1991, the Directorate of Federal-State Operations conducted 21,230 consultation visits, resulting in the correction of more than 60,000 serious hazards.
OSHA's Office of Training and Education conducted training courses in FY 1991 for approximately 1,677 Federal and 1,894 State compliance officers, State consultants, and safety and health representatives from the Federal and private sectors.
The Training Office also offered for non-compliance personnel shortened versions of regular courses on respiratory protection, principles of ergonomics, hazardous materials, and electrical standards.
Approximately $1.24 million was awarded to 22 organizations under the New Directions grant program, which provides funds to nonprofit organizations to develop their staff, skills, and services to become competent job safety and health centers.
Another $340,000 in grants was awarded to four organizations to develop training and education programs on agricultural safety and health hazards, and on hazard communication for small businesses.
The Office of Field Programs coordinated various significant activities in FY 1991 with respect to criminal enforcement, corporatewide settlement agreements, and other initiatives.
On June 1, 1991, three of the OSHA regions began Criminal Enforcement Pilot Programs to determine the effectiveness of procedures to expedite the referral of criminal cases for prosecution.
The procedures were developed at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center in Glynco, Georgia.
During FY 1991, 16 criminal cases were referred to the Department of Justice, and three OSHA criminal cases that had been referred to the Department of Justice in prior fiscal years were successfully prosecuted.
The procedures for conducting corporatewide settlement agreements were detailed in a directive called "Guidelines for the Administration of Corporate Wide Settlement Agreements".
In FY 1991, the Office of Field Programs coordinated the monitoring of corporatewide settlement agreements by, first, setting up interim procedures to coordinate day-to-day monitoring activities and, second, developing an automated system within the Office of Field Programs to collect and compile monitoring data.
The office reported from 15 to 20 active corporatewide settlement agreements that covered responsibilities at more than 150 sites.
Coordinated the OSHA/EPA joint inspection of 30 hazardous waste incinerators as a result of a written cooperative agreement between the two agencies.
A joint report of the findings was issued in April 1991.
Coordinated the investigations of the Citgo and IMC Fertilizer catastrophes to determine the cause and any non-compliance with OSHA regulations.
Implemented an OSHA/EPA MOU for joint onsite inspections at petrochemical facilities selected from OSHA's Petrochemical Industry Special Emphasis Program.
OSHA initiated three joint inspections in FY 1991 and this activity was expected to continue in FY 1992.
Increased awareness of ergonomic hazards in the workplace through major investigations in various industries which have resulted in high penalty citations, publicity, and corporate settlements to research and implement control measures.
Developed and provided a training package for all regions to implement the OSHA's new penalty calculation schedule.
Initiated, through regional administrators, 36 local programs on hazardous operations such as logging, pulp and paper mills, foundries, elevated working surfaces, oil and gas well drilling, and commercial diving.
Increased coordination with other Federal agencies on safety and health hazards to ensure the best use of safety and health resources through mechanisms such as MOUs, referrals, and training and inspection activities.
Enforcement Training Center in Glynco, Georgia.
Implemented 1991 revisions to the Field Operations Program Plan, including the development of new Integrated Management Information System (IMIS)1 output reports to track regional progress against inspection goals.
Improved regional planning by encourage flexible enforcement programs specific to regions, involving all levels of regional staff in planning process; and qualitatively measuring the success of regional activities, when appropriate.
Other initiatives taken by Field Programs included employee involvement and quality improvement efforts such as a limited flexiplace project, employee participation in developing the FY 1992 region performance plan, continued use of employee surveys, team building retreats, and developmental assessment centers, all of which encourage strong employee involvement in local and regional initiatives.
The Office of Field Programs, Division of Field Performance Evaluation, in FY 1991 made extensive use of the office's Disaster Teams to expedite the flow of information about significant workplace accidents from the field to the Office of the Assistant Secretary; developed and delivered a training program for OSHA's field employees on how to implement OSHA's revised penalty system; and developed an Office of Field Programs manual that provided staff members with a ready reference of information about OSHA, its organization, and general administrative matters.
During FY 1991, the Directorate of Compliance Programs, Office of General Industry Compliance Assistance, coordinated the review of 26 egregious cases.
High penalty citations were issued for cases involving, Citgo ($8.1 million), Fraser Paper ($3.9 million), Arco Chemical ($3.5 million), General Motors ($2.7 million), Samsonite ($1.6 million), Gene T. Jones ($1.2 million), and BASF ($1 million).
The dollar amount of penalties proposed by the States in FY 1991 was $32,655,170; Federal OSHA proposed penalties amounted to $91.7 million.
OSHA has continued to enter into corporatewide settlement agreements, thereby significantly extending the reach of its enforcement actions.
Examples of such settlements are General Motors and Cargill (ergonomics); Arco, Phillips, and Citgo (chemical process safety management); ASARCO (lead); and USX (general safety and health).
General Industry Compliance also coordinated the petrochemical Special Emphasis Program, which will continue into FY 1992.
This program focuses on areas at petrochemical plants that are prone to have catastrophic accidents.
Six comprehensive inspections, lasting an average of four months, were completed and six additional inspections were begun during FY 1991.
The Office of Federal Agency Programs examined Federal agency workplaces for compliance with OSHA requirements and performed or initiated federal safety and health program evaluations for the Department of Veterans'Affairs, the Department of Labor, the Department of Defense, and the Department of Energy.
The office also hosted the 45th Annual Federal Safety and Health Conference in Las Vegas.
The Office of Health Compliance Assistance worked closely with the Directorate of Health Standards Programs on interpreting various health standards to ensure compliance feasibility.
1991 focused on indoor air quality, formaldehyde, post-emergency response training, hazard communication revisions, and catastrophic response.
The Office of Construction and Maritime Compliance Assistance continued to work closely with the Office of Statistic to consider different approaches to construction targeting systems.
The Maritime Crane Accreditation Program certified over 130 agencies which inspected more than 10,000 maritime cranes.
The Office of Whistleblower Protection Programs continued to investigate discrimination cases and to provide protection for "whistleblower" employees covered under Section 11(c) of the OSH Act, Section 405 of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act, Section 211 of the Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act and Section 7 of the International Safe Container Act.
This office also helped develop an alternate dispute resolution program and a program of criminal investigator training for field staff.
During FY 1991, the Directorate of Technical Support played a major role in executing activities related to the North American Free Trade Agreement between the United States and Mexico.
Much of the focus in FY 1991 was on developing an understanding of the Mexican safety and health organization, its operations, and regulations.
The paperwork for this activity was indexed, catalogued, and is being stored in the Technical Data Center for ready retrieval and reference.
The fire disaster in Hamlet, North Carolina, resulted in the Directorate of Technical Support developing program guidelines and preparing letters to professional organizations, labor unions, trade associations, and insurance companies urging them to adhere to fire prevention rules to help protect workers.
Other program areas in which Technical Support played major roles in FY 1991 included ergonomics, occupational nursing and medicine, laboratory testing, and publishing.
In the ergonomics area, technical support was provided for field inspections and monitoring of meatpacking plants and postal facilities.
Evaluations of work stations were performed at several Federal agencies both within and outside the Department of Labor.
Technical Support also provided testimony at congressional hearings on ergonomic matters, and numerous speeches were delivered to trade associations and labor organizations.
The Office of Ergonomic Support provided significant support to the development of OSHA's proposed standard on ergonomics.
The office also hired two industrial engineers and an industrial psychologist, and for additional support, contracted for the services of an ergonomics expert.
A second occupational health nurse joined the Directorate of Technical Support in FY 1991, providing support to OSHA's standards development programs and field compliance activities.
Both occupational health nurses provided technical advice and input in the development of an ergonomics standard, revision of the recordkeeping requirements and development of a bloodborne pathogens standard.
The nurse internship program also supported four interns in FY 1991.
The Office of Occupational Medicine continued to provide medical and epidemiological assistance to the field and national office in support of health-related investigations, standards development, employer/employee education, and for training and compliance assistance.
The office provided support to OSHA's mandatory Medical Examination Program for all agency compliance officers and covered positions, resulting in more than 1,000 examinations in FY 1991.
The office also prepared more than 40 medical access orders to assist inspectors in compliance activities.
OSHA implemented a program to evaluate and recognize qualified safety testing laboratories that meet specific criteria as defined in 29 CFR 1910.7 as Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratories.
These laboratories will be authorized to approve specific products for use in the workplace.
In FY 1991, seven laboratory organizations were accredited by OSHA to certify products for use in the workplace.
The laboratory at the Salt Lake Technical Center provided support to OSHA's compliance program by processing 54,800 samples, involving more than 154,400 analyses, as well as providing assistance with 16 litigated cases.
As a resource for technical information, the Technical Center responded to 7,276 calls for technical assistance, and provided more than 2,000 analytical methods to industry and other requesters.
Other significant activities in FY 1991 by the Salt Lake Technical Center included providing technical informatiion and assistance to the Mexican government in establishing an industrial hygiene program, aiding the Directorate of Health Standards by testifying at the 1,3-butadiene hearings, and providing, through the Center's Health Response Team, on-site industrial hygiene assistance on 43 projects initiated by field requests.
In FY 1991, Technical Support also finalized and published eight new chapters of the OSHA Technical Manual, which included such subjects as indoor air quality investigation, chemical protective clothing, and demolition.
Planning began in FY 1991 for the upgrading and expansion of OSHA's computerized information system, available to all OSHA components.
In FY 1991, Technical Support, in cooperation with NIOSH, finalized and published eight new chapters of the OSHA Technical Manual, which included subjects such as technical equipment, indoor air quality, investigation, chemical protective clothing, and demolition.
In addition, OSHA and NIOSH jointly developed and updated 500 guidlelines on hazardous chemicals.
The Directorate also published 10 Hazard Information Bulletins in FY 1991 on topics such as defective equipment, hazardous conditions, and inadequate techniques in the workplace.
Planning began in FY 1991 to upgrade and expand OSHA's computerized information system to make to make it available to other Federal agencies and to provide a central location for Material Safety Data Sheets required by OSHA's Hazard Communication Standard.
The Docket Office continued to track and control various dockets and public hearings.
Of note was the Office's response to more than 400 requests generated by the 30-day reopening of the comment period for the process safety management docket.
Other activity in FY 1991 indicated a revised interest in older docket information on microfilm or stored in the National Records Center.
In Fiscal Year 1991, the Directorate of Policy continued to promote improved cooperation with other Federal agencies aimed at enhancing worker safety and health protection.
In November 1990, former Secretary of Labor, Elizabeth Dole and William E. Reilly, Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency, signed a Memorandum of Understanding to coordinate certain enforcement actions.
This MOU was implemented through a joint workplan under which OSHA and EPA initiated programs to exchange data, provide training, and conduct a number of joint inspections.
Agriculture's Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS).
This MOU provided training to FSIS inspectors and implement referral procedures relating to safety and health hazards in meat and poultry processing plants subject to FSIS inspection.
OSHA reform legislation was introduced in both the House and the Senate in August 1991.
This legislation contemplated important changes in the OSH Act, including mandatory written safety and health programs and labor-management committees, expedited standards-setting, employees' rights, and expanded criminal sanctions.
Other legislation concerned issues such as construction safety and indoor air.
The Policy Directorate prepared agency witnesses to participate 15 congressional hearings during FY 1991 relating to these bills or to other OSHA-related concerns.
In FY 1991, the Office of Construction and Engineering continued to provide technical expertise to complement OSHA's enforcement actions, study the causes of construction accidents, and work cooperatively with the private sector to promote construction safety.
On March 3, 1991, when an explosion at a Citgo refinery in Lake Charles, Louisiana, killed two plant workers and four contract employees, the Office of Construction and Engineering led the technical investigation to determine its cause.
This joint effort by the Office and the OSHA field staff resulted in an expeditious initiation of abatement procedures.
Other accident investigations conducted by the Office in FY 1991 included a major excavation collapse that occurred on November 19, 1990, in Washington, D.C., attributed to faulty design of the excavation bracing; a crane collapse in West Virginia; a chlorine release in Nevada; a collapsed scaffold in New York; failed building components in Georgia; wall collapses in Virginia and New Jersey; and bridge and tower collapses in Texas.
The office also provided expert witness support in enforcement actions.
At least one case resulted in the successful criminal prosecution of a contractor.
The office completed a study that analyzes construction fatalaties occurring between 19854 and 1989.
This study identifies the causes of construction accidents and contributing factors such as worker age, company size, and specific construction trade.
Approximately 5,000 copies of the report were distributed to Federal agencies, construction firms, labor groups, insurance organizations, and academic institutions.
An expansion of this study is anticipated in FY 1992 to include workers' compensation data on construction accidents.
Outreach efforts by the office to promote construction safety included teaching the OSHA Private Sector Construction safety course at 23 locations nationwide, where nearly 1,000 construction personnel representing labor and management attended.
The office also interacted with more than 30 constituent groups from the construction community including labor, academia, and construction associations.
The Office developed a video on crane safety, a compliance directive on elevator construction safety, and participated in industry programs on hazard communication and scaffold safety.
In some instances, these actions led to an improved understanding by industry of OSHA regulations or to joint government and industry projects.
The 1991 fiscal year witnessed a period of solid performance by the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) in serving the Nation's workers and employers through its three major components: the Wage and Hour Division (WH), the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), and the Office of Workers Compensation Programs (OWCP).
Despite budgetary constraints, ESA achieved record levels of performance which supported the Department's objective of developing a welltrained, well-educated and productive workforce to give the Nation a competitive edge in today's global market.
During the year, the Wage and Hour Division undertook an intensive informational program to advise employers and workers of changes in Federal wage laws.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs celebrated the 25th anniversary of the signing of Executive Order 11246.
The Report on the Glass Ceiling Initiative, which identified artificial barriers which keep qualified men and women from moving into senior corporate management pòsitions, was widely disseminated.
OFCCP continued its emphasis on promoting and strengthening a cooperative working relationship with Federal contractors through its Exemplary Voluntary Effort (EVE) Awards program.
In addition, 17 new liaison groups were formed to help assure compliance with the Executive Order.
Other major accomplishments included an initiative to help women and minorities gain better access to the skilled trades and better-paying jobs by OFCCP, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, and the Women's Bureau.
For the second consecutive year, the program for Federal workers helped rehabilitate a record number.
Research staff began work on a joint US/Mexico child labor study.
And ESA continued to update its electronic data programs and capability.
The Division undertook an extensive compliance assistance campaign to promote public awareness of the final statutory increase in the Federal minimum wage as provided by the 1989 Amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
Effective April 1, 1991, the minimum wage increased to $4.25 an hour; the training wage increased to a minimum of $3.62 an hour.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted a total of 60,685 compliance actions under the FLSA and completed action on 48,822 complaints alleging violations of the Act's minimum wage and/or overtime provisions.
As a result, more than $142.7 million in unpaid back wages was found due to 382,918 workers, and $115.3 million in back wages was agreed-to-be-paid to 350,652 workers.
Wage and Hour carried out its 1991 child labor enforcement strategy focusing on education, outreach and compliance assistance to apprise employers, youth, their parents and educators of new higher statutory civil money penalties for child labor violations.
It also promoted broader awareness regarding child labor laws and the requirements for compliance.
This was combined with concerted enforcement efforts through directed investigations.
The Division carried out a series of child labor enforcement initiatives (strike forces) planned and conducted by Wage and Hour regional and district offices with the aim of targeting those industries and areas where more serious child labor violations most commonly occur.
This strategy of education and enforcement initiatives generally focused on large employers of youth, including specifically summer employees in the amusement and recreation industries and in resort cities.
These initiatives were supported by newly designated child labor coordinators in each regional and district office.
Wage and Hour conducted 31,763 investigations in which child labor compliance was examined; 27,655 minors were found to be illegally employed, and more than $8.3 million in civil money penalties for violations found was collected.
In the government contracts compliance area, Wage and Hour completed 3,419 actions, including resolution of 2,700 complaints alleging violations, to enforce prevailing wage requirements under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contracts Act (SCA) and other government contract labor standards statutes.
These actions to assure compliance with prevailing wage rates resulted in findings of more than $45.2 million in back wages due to 47,597 workers, and recovery of $40.4 million in back wages for 46,493 workers.
On September 16, 1991, Wage and Hour adjusted the prevailing health and welfare fringe benefit levels required on Federal contracts subject to the SCA.
As a result, close to a million service workers would receive an increase in benefits, the first since 1986.
The methodology utilized new data regarding prevailing fringe benefits payments collected and reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
During FY 1991, Wage and Hour, in addition to its ongoing farm labor enforcement program, conducted a coordinated enforcement effort in the central States' mid-continental migrant stream.
Wage and Hour completed 3,523 investigations under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA), 1,204 migrant housing inspections, 395 investigations under the temporary nonimmigrant agricultural worker (or H-2A) program, and 1,385 Reportable Worker (SAW/RAW) investigations.
During the 1991 fiscal year, the Wage and Hour Division published a number of regulations.
Proposed regulations were published for comment to implement a provision in the 1989 FLSA Amendments permitting employers to provide up to 10 hours per week of "remedial education" to certain employees under specified conditions without requiring payment of overtime premium pay for the time so spent.
Also, pursuant to the 1989 FLSA Amendments, a Notice of Proposed Rule Making was published to implement civil money penalty authority for repeat and willful minimum wage and overtime pay violations.
On February 27, interim final regulations were published to implement a new FLSA exemption for certain computer system analysts, computer programmers, software engineers, and other similarly skilled computer professionals from the FLSA's overtime requirements, provided their rate of pay exceeds six and one-half times the minimum wage.
These regulations became effective on March 29, 1991; the public comment period on the interim final rule closed on April 29, 1991.
Two other significant rule changes were published in September relating to exemption from the FLSA's minimum wage and overtime compensation requirements for executive, administrative, and professional employees in the public sector.
First, an interim final rule, requesting public comment, was published and became effective on September 6, 1991.
This provided that the "salary basis" component of the tests for exemption for public employees will not be defeated solely because they are paid according to a pay system that requires the use of paid leave or, absent accrued leave, requires that their pay be reduced on an hour-for-hour basis for personal absences of less than one workday.
A second, companion rulemaking proposal was also published on the same date requesting public comment.
This proposed rule would provide that the "salary basis" component of tests for exemption for public employees would not be defeated if the governmental employer has a pay system like that described above and either had made no deductions from its employees' pay for absences of less than one workday, or had reimbursed its otherwise-exempt employees for all such deductions taken before September 6, 1991.
These two rules ensure that the Department's regulations allow appropriate application of the overtime exemption for public sector employers.
Without the rule changes, State and local governments may face inappropriate overtime pay obligations to upper-level public managers involving potentially enormous, unforeseen liabilities.
Wage and Hour reviewed comments received regarding its proposed revisions to three nonagricultural hazardous occupations orders applicable to minors under the age of 18.
These proposed revisions eliminate a waiver provision to allow minors to drive school buses under certain conditions and clarify prohibitions on the employment of minors in jobs that involve the use of power-driven meat slicers and paper balers.
On February 28, 1991, final regulations were published to reflect the statutorily increased ceiling for child labor civil money penalty assessments applicable to violations occurring after November 5, 1991, in assessments issued starting March 1, 1991.
Regulatory changes allowing for the expanded use of "helpers" on Davis-Bacon-covered construction projects became effective February 4, 1991, after a Federal Register notice providing 60-days advance notice of their effective date was published in December 1990.
Federal contracting agencies about the revisions, revised the Davis-Bacon wage survey form to accommodate the collection of helper data, began revising its automated wage survey system, and developed necessary procedures and criteria for conducting wage surveys involving helpers and for processing requests for additional classifications and wage rates (conformances) for helpers.
However, these activities were suspended following enactment of the Dire Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Bill, which prohibited the Department from expending funds to implement the helper regulations.
On March 4, 1991, the Department issued final regulations (superseding interim final regulations previously in effect) implementing the Employee Polygraph Protection Act.
These regulations provided employees and prospective employees in the private sector with protection against polygraph testing both in pre-employment settings and during the course of their employment, with certain limited exceptions.
On November 29, 1990, the Immigration Act of 1990 was enacted, amending the Immigration and Nationality Act and creating a number of programs with new responsibilities for the Department relating to employment-based immigration.
The new immigration programs for which Wage and Hour received new enforcement responsibilities involve: foreign students (with F-1 visas) employed off-campus, workers employed in specialty occupations (admitted under H-1B visas), and foreign crewmembers (D-visa holders) performing longshore work.
Employers wishing to employ nonimmigrants under any of these programs must file with the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) attesting to their compliance with the programs' requirements.
Wage and Hour became responsible for ensuring employer compliance with their attestations.
During FY 1991, Wage and Hour and ETA worked closely to publish proposed rules for the H-1B program and an interim final regulation for the foreign crewmember/longshore program.
Several other important rule making initiatives completed during the year include publication of an interim final rule to implement the Immigration Nurses Relief Act of 1989.
Wage and Hour completed initial training of all managers and nearly all of its employees in Total Quality Management (TQM) concepts, principles and skills.
The objectives of the training were to enable Wage and Hour to begin to use quality management approaches to improving the effectiveness of its work processes, enforcement and service delivery.
By the end of the fiscal year, more than 100 employee work teams were in operation throughout the regions and the national office, focusing on process and customer service improvements.
Consistent with quality management principles, Wage and Hour operational planning and evaluation mechanisms and field managers'performance standards were substantially revised to reflect the move to "doing work" using total quality management principles and practices.
Program performance will be measured by quality, timeliness, and effectiveness in providing services to the agency's many diverse customers.
Based on the successful implementation of total quality management (TQM), the Federal Quality Institute, a quasiindependent interagency, selected the San Francisco region as a finalist from among 30 applicants for its prestigious Quality Improvement Prototype Award.
The award recognized organizations that "have successfully adopted TQM principles and thereby improved the quality, timeliness, and efficiency of their services or products".
The Institute was set up in June 1988 to promote TQM in the Federal sector.
During FY 1991, significant additional progress was made in pursuing a variety of initiatives to decentralize and delegate full authority and responsibility for enforcement-related work processes that previously required action, review or approval in Wage and Hour's national or regional offices.
These initiatives represented a practical result of the program's total quality management implementation and, as they were completed, were intended to serve to empower employees, eliminate unnecessary workload processing steps, and improve customer service.
In addition, significant progress was made on recommendations of the Secretary's Enforcement Task Force and the Office of Inspector General to enhance the criminal enforcement component of its overall compliance program in order to use criminal prosecutions, where appropriate, as a deterrent to violations and as an incentive to comply.
During the year, a criminal enforcement coordinator for Wage and Hour was designated; criminal enforcement coordinators were designated in each region; the program's Criminal Enforcement Task Force continued work on revising existing Wage and Hour criminal enforcement policies and procedures, and criminal enforcement training was incorporated in Wage and Hour's basic and advanced investigator training courses.
In addition, nine Wage and Hour employees, including two members of the Criminal Enforcement Task Force and one regional criminal enforcement coordinator, participated in criminal enforcement training at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center in Glynco, Georgia.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) began the 1991 fiscal year with a celebration marking the 25th anniversary of the signing of Executive Order 11246.
Through the enforcement of affirmative action and equal employment opportunity efforts, OFCCP has played a major role in integrating minorities and women into the American work force.
Over the years more than 200,000 Federal service, supply and construction contractors have been subject to the affirmative action and equal employment requirements of the order.
FY 1991 marked another productive year for OFCCP.
Even with the loss of five percent of its compliance officers, OFCCP completed a significant number of compliance actions during the year: 5,379 compliance reviews and 1,278 complaint investigations.
The compliance reviews completed by OFCCP were at contractor facilities employing 2,229,367 employees.
In addition, OFCCP obtained $30,432,427 in financial awards benefitting 5,536 persons.
Two major initiatives complemented OFCCP's enforcement and technical assistance efforts: the findings of the glass ceiling pilot study were made public, and an intensive training effort launched the agreement between OFCCP, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) and the Women's Bureau providing for joint enforcement of Labor Department regulations requiring equal employment opportunity in apprenticeship and training.
Additionally, OFCCP began work on regulations for the implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in FY 1992.
In enforcing Executive Order 11246, Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act, and the Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 through compliance reviews and complaint investigations, attempts were made to negotiate and conciliate appropriate remedies for any violations discovered.
During FY 1991, OFCCP entered into 2,886 conciliation agreements and 1,272 letters of commitment and settlement agreements with Federal contractors that corrected violations found.
In addition, 811 agreements were negotiated in which contractors committed $30,432,427 for front pay, back pay, salary adjustments, accommodations, recruitment, and training costs.
Of this total, $11,732,348 was for back pay awards for 1,882 women, minorities, persons with disabilities, and veterans.
Included among the settlements was one for more than $500,000 for 28 individuals with actual or perceived handicapping conditions.
OFCCP began formal enforcement proceedings and sought sanctions that could result in the removal of a contractor from eligibility to compete for Federal contracts until compliance was demonstrated.
OFCCP initiated 83 recommendations for enforcement action, and the Solicitor of Labor filed formal administrative complaints against 34 Federal contractors.
Compliance officers provided 16,394 contractors with 54,420 hours of compliance assistance to help them understand and comply with OFCCP regulations and the compliance review process.
Liaison groups were another means used by OFCCP to encourage voluntary compliance.
These employer and constituent groups explored general compliance problems and solutions in a cooperative setting.
They provided valuable input to OFCCP on ways to improve the compliance process and address aspects of affirmative action unique to their employment situations or industries.
OFCCP, in turn, provided advice, specific technical assistance, and an exchange of information.
During FY 1991, 17 new liaison groups were formed.
OFCCP also arranged 1,653 linkage agreements between employers and agencies providing worker training or referral services.
OFCCP continued to strengthen voluntary affirmative action among the contractor community through its Exemplary Voluntary Effort (EVE) Awards program which publicly recognized employers for their creativity in developing innovative affirmative action plans and for efforts to increase employment opportunities for minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities.
Nine employers and one liaison group received the EVE Award at the 1991 ceremony.
This was the first year that OFCCP honored a liaison group with the EVE Award.
Additionally, one contractor was honored with the Secretary's Opportunity 2000 Award.
This award recognized an employer who has initiated comprehensive programs that consider future work force challenges while assuring equality of opportunity and full human resource utilization.
The "Report on the Glass Ceiling Initiative" was released in August 1991, culminating a pilot study begun two years ago to identify artificial barriers that prevent minorities and women from advancing to mid- and upper-level management positions in the corporate world and to determine how such barriers could be removed.
The initiative was prompted by evidence from routine compliance reviews by OFCCP and from research findings that although minorities and women had made significant gains over the last 20 years in the general workforce and in entry-level management, very few minorities or women were in mid- or upper- level management positions in the corporate world.
The first phase of the initiative was to strengthen the Department's understanding of corporate operations and practices at senior levels; the second was to conduct pilot compliance reviews focused on those levels; the third was to serve as a catalyst to foster corporate voluntary efforts in this area; the last was to publicly recognize contractors demonstrating exemplary efforts to eliminate discriminatory and artificial barriers.
Findings of the pilot study included data based on reviews conducted in nine Fortune 500 companies which ranged in size from less than 8,000 employees to more than 300,000.
Seven companies were in broad industry groups located in five geographic regions.
The level beyond which minorities and women had not yet advanced was considerably lower than originally anticipated.
Minorities plateaued at a lower level than women.
There was little or no monitoring of equal access and opportunity in the employment process or the developmental and reward systems (such as bonuses or perquisites) applicable to upper level management positions.
Minorities and women tended to be concentrated in staff functions (such as human resources, public relations, and legal) rather than in the line areas (such as sales or manufacturing) that have traditionally led to upper management positions.
Although none of the companies was cited for discrimination in their practices relating to mid- to upper-level management jobs, a number of attitudinal and organizational barriers were identified.
These barriers included: reliance on word-of-mouth and employee referral networking; use of executive search or referral firms without making affirmative action/EEO policy known to them, and lack of credential-building assignments.
Based on results of the pilot reviews, OFCCP developed a detailed guide on conducting glass ceiling reviews.
The guide was to be issued to field staff for use in conducting reviews in FY 1992.
The apprenticeship initiative began with Secretary's Order 4-90 and the Memorandum of Understanding between the Women's Bureau, BAT and OFCCP.
To implement this initiative, BAT and OFCCP, with the Women's Bureau, developed a joint training program for their staffs for enforcement of Title 29 CFR, Part 30, Equal Employment Opportunity in Apprenticeship and Training.
The OFCCP and BAT training teams cooperated in drafting a set of procedures for conducting compliance reviews and complaint investigations under the apprenticeship regulations.
This involved a melding of approaches and techniques used by the two agencies.
The Women's Bureau, the Civil Rights Division of the Solicitor's Office, and ESA's Office of Training also provided critical support in this effort.
After pilot sessions in June, teams of OFCCP, BAT and Women's Bureau staff began field training in early August.
The National, regional, State and district management staffs of the three agencies were trained first.
30 sessions to train field compliance staff across the country.
In all, more than 1,200 compliance personnel, managers, and professional staff were trained.
Each agency included instructions for the enforcement of 29 CFR 30 and the implementation of the apprenticeship initiative in its FY 1992 Operational Plan.
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) required that OFCCP and the Department of Justice coordinate with the EEOC to ensure that there was no duplication of efforts in the processing of complaints, and that the agencies followed the same substantive standards.
After extensive consultation, OFCCP and EEOC published proposed coordination regulations for public comment.
The proposal covered the joint processing of complaints and procedures for resolution of policy issues.
Final rules were scheduled to be published during the 1992 fiscal year.
Enactment of the ADA provided an opportunity for OFCCP to develop needed revisions to its implementing regulations for Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
In FY 1991, OFCCP drafted revisions to Section 503 regulations.
These revisions incorporated the amendments that had been made to the statute, reorganized and clarified affirmative action requirements, and incorporated the substantive nondiscrimination requirements of the ADA itself.
OFCCP planned to publish draft regulations as final rules before the effective date of the ADA, July 26, 1992.
In FY 1991, OWCP capped its long, sustained effort to build a modern automated data processing capability by installing new equipment in the remaining Federal Employees' Compensation (FECA) district offices.
In addition, OWCP brought Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act (LHWCA) data processing operations in all but two offices onto the new system.
The FECA program began to take advantage of this new, expanded computer base by building the first stage of a truly automated accounting system and making other enhancements to its automated programs to improve program administration.
FY 1991 saw the implementation of a Patient Advocacy Project designed to measure the effectiveness of early medical intervention in low back injury compensation cases.
An FECA regulation was prepared concerning schedule award benefit coverage that broke new ground.
The Longshore program expanded Special Fund oversight activities.
Black Lung extended its case monitoring activities and successfully automated its program directive distribution process, creating the possibility of similar automation for all of OWCP in the future.
In FY 1991, OWCP installed new minicomputers in the remaining FECA district offices.
Individual personal computers linked by Local Area Networks (LANs) provided virtually all staff with full-time access to data.
Existing system capabilities were also enhanced by the addition of an automated Debt Management System.
This enhancement represented the first segment of a complete integrated accounting package and replaced the previous contractor-owned system.
It was expected to save FECA $200,000 in time sharing costs annually.
The new Debt Management System provided district office staff with immediate access to accounts receivable information through their personal computers.
It also cross-referenced the compensation claim number against the information in the automated claim record, allowing the user to ensure that there was a case record for each debt account established.
An automated duplicate medical bill checking capability also became available in September 1991.
This capability eliminated the need for time-consuming manual medical record checks and greatly reduced the probability of duplicate medical bill payments.
Installation of the Physician's Directory System (PDS) in all Federal Employees'Compensation (FECA) district offices was completed in July 1991.
The PDS, accessible through the medical assistant's personal computer, provided an automated physician location and referral service for second opinion and impartial medical examinations in FECA cases.
Its database contained the names and select specialties of physicians throughout the United States, geographically divided to correspond with each district office jurisdiction.
In its ongoing effort to improve service to injured employees and reduce compensation costs, the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) began a demonstration Patient Advocacy Project in July 1991 to determine if early intervention techniques could effectively return more workers with low back injuries to productive employment.
Most studies indicated that 80 percent to 90 percent of these workers experienced an improvement in their condition within the first two months following injury.
OWCP sought to identify cases with recovery potential where the claimant had not returned to work within that two-month period.
The protocol for the study was based upon the results of a three-year project conducted by OWCP and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
Registered nurses, acting as patient advocates, were intervening in low back injury cases and providing support and encouragement for the claimant, recoveryrelated problem solving assistance, and diagnostic and treatment procedures monitoring.
These treatment-oriented and supportive interventions were expected to contribute to a positive injury outcome.
The study was initiated in three FECA district offices.
Actual contact with claimants and physicians was to occur over a sevenmonth period; data collection was to continue for an additional six months.
The program expected to issue a report detailing the results by the end of 1992.
A proposed rule extending schedule award benefit coverage to female organs was published in the Code of Federal Regulations, September 20, 1991.
This rule represented the first exercise of the Secretary's discretion to add to the award schedule since 1975, and, for the first time, provided coverage to women that had been available to men since 1975.
With the closing of the 45 day period for comments, OWCP was in the process of determining final language, considering retroactive application issues, and establishing an implementation date.
In a series of workshops around the country, professional rehabilitation counselors were trained and certified to receive OWCP cases and provide services to FECA and Longshore injured workers for a period of two years, with three option years.
This was the first all-OWCP certification since 1987.
In addition, the FECA program rehabilitated a record 1,490 disabled Federal workers, exceeding the previous year's recordsetting total of 1,450 by 40.
These numbers indicated that using nurses to intervene early in disability cases was an effective way to increase rehabilitation.
Clearly, using certified rehabilitation counselors to screen new cases, a practice which became general in FY 1990, was resulting in more case openings and subsequent rehabilitation.
Federal Employees'Compensation district offices implemented new case management procedures for paying temporary total disability benefits in the spring of FY 1991 and began placing appropriate cases on a short-term benefit roll for time periods derived from disability guidelines and expected return-to-work target dates.
Before the authorized benefit period expired, claims examiners reviewed a case and ordered additional medical evidence if necessary.
Claimants who recovered sufficiently could return to the workplace; those who had not could continue to receive benefit payments for additional periods of time.
In very severe injury cases, payments were still authorized for an indefinite period as before).
This method of case and cost management was designed to manage the early stages of disability, monitor cases as they were placed on the long-term periodic benefits roll, and get those employees who were able to work back into the work force at the appropriate time.
While it was still too early to expect significant results, the new technique showed a decrease in the number of cases being paid on a daily interim basis, most of which would have eventually moved to the long-term, monthly payment roll.
Seven district offices began testing a concept in which claims units worked as a team to handle a block of injury cases, rotating the responsibility for functions such as initial adjudication and payment of claims among the members.
In traditional units an examiner had complete responsibility for a set of cases.
The experiment was designed to increase the efficiency and level of service of the units.
Employees were involved in designing the rotational system and solving problems that arose.
Evaluation was scheduled to occur after one year.
Longshore connected seven more district offices to the new OWCP data system: Boston, Philadelphia, and Chicago, colocated with OWCP regional offices, shared the new minicomputers with FECA in those cities; telecommunication lines linked the non-co-located offices in Baltimore, Norfolk, New Orleans, and Houston to their respective OWCP regional offices in Philadelphia and Dallas.
The two remaining district offices were to be connected early in the next fiscal year.
Special Fund automated support systems conversions were planned for FY 1993.
During FY 1991, the Longshore program stepped up its efforts to ensure that Special Fund costs were fairly distributed among employers and that reserves of employers and insurers were adequate to cover their future compensation liabilities by enforcing Form LS-513 certification requirements and adding selected insurance carriers to those Special Fund contributors who are required to file Form LS-274, Report of Injury Experience.
The fund also makes payments in a number of other specific types of cases under provisions of the act.
A new procedure, announced to the industry in FY 1990 and requiring that Report of Payments (Form LS-513) be certified by an independent CPA or actuary, went into effect in FY 1991.
The form is filed each year in connection with the Special Fund Assessment, and information on the form is used to calculate the proportionate share of the assessment due from each company.
Enforcement of the requirement for independent certification of the LS-513 helps to ensure equitable assessments for all companies contributing to the Special Fund.
The program also expanded the required filings of Form LS-274, Report of Injury Experience, to include selected insurance carriers.
The information on these reports determines any needed adjustments to the self-insurer's security requirement.
In the past this report was required semi-annually from each selfinsured employer.
Selected insurance carriers are now required to submit reports for review by the program and adjustments are being made to their security deposits as necessary.
In the event of insolvency, the required security deposit is used to pay benefits on the company's Longshore claims instead of drawing payments from the Special Fund.
In the past, this report was required semi-annually only from authorized self-insured employers.
Because a security requirement has now been established for certain insurance carriers, these carriers are required to file reports of outstanding liabilities.
This initiative combined bi-monthly informational mailings with file reviews to ensure that claimants who receive monthly and/or medical benefits directly from responsible coal mine operators or medical benefits only from the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund are aware of and receiving all benefits to which they are entitled.
By the end of the fiscal year, 17,883 of approximately 45,000 affected cases had been reviewed.
The entire process was expected to be completed by the end of the 1992 fiscal year.
Early in July 1991 the Black Lung program began installing Personal Librarian software in its district offices.
The process was completed in August; training for all district office and national office personnel was concluded in September.
Personal Librarian transforms the program directive system by storing Black Lung program directives in a data base and making them instantly accessible on a personal computer.
OWCP was investigating the feasibility of making this software available to all three compensation programs in the future.
The Office of Policy Management and Analysis (OPMA), through its Division of Legislative and Regulatory Analysis and the Division of Policy Analysis and Research, advised and assisted the Assistant Secretary in the coordination and development of various policy, research, legislative and regulatory initiatives.
It also utilized Total Quality Management concepts to improve the delivery of its services to the Assistant Secretary and ESA operating programs.
The Division of Legislative and Regulatory Analysis reviewed over 300 Congressional bills and related reports to determine the impact on ESA-administered programs.
The Division audited numerous congressional hearings and markups regarding issues that affect those programs.
It served as a focal point for the development and coordination of testimony and briefing materials used by agency officials in testifying before Congressional Committees.
The Division served as the primary source for coordination and implementation of ESA's entries into the Regulatory Program of the United States Government, and for entries into the Semiannual Unified Agenda of the Federal Regulations.
These entries relate to regulations on such issues as the Americans with Disabilities Act, child labor civil money penalties and hazardous occupations orders, and the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
DLRA closely monitored and coordinated ESA input for the Department's implementation of the Administrative Disputes Resolution Act.
In FY 1991, the Division of Policy Analysis and Research put into place a research agenda of both in-house and contract research.
Research projects provided data and information to assist ESA and its programs in assessing the effect of varying work hours on children's educational performance; examining the nature of the employer response to changing U.S. demographics; analyzing the econometric relationship between teen employment and academic performance, health, safety and well being; and providing detailed tables on 1989-92 projections showing 14/15- year old disaggregated labor force data.
Some of the Division's in-house research included: providing the Wage and Hour Division data to update budget allocation formulas, reviewing the validity of a statistical test for use by OFCCP employment opportunity specialists (EOSs), and coordinating ESA input into the Office of Assistant Secretary for Policy's department-wide enforcement data base project to permit comparisons of different Labor Department enforcement programs.
The Division also performed a cost and benefit analysis of proposed Americans with Disability Act regulations and analyzed 1the potential use of Alternative Dispute Resolution methods by the Employment Standards Administration.
In FY 1991, as part of the Administration's efforts regarding the North American Free Trade Agreement, Division staff began work with officials in Mexico on a joint study of the child labor problem in both countries.
The joint study was designed to review and compare the labor force characteristics of both countries; the nature and extent of the participation of children in the labor forces in both countries; the laws and regulations governing the employment of young people; and the problems and progress that both countries have experienced in this area.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) continued to place special emphasis on programs to help the mining industry achieve "zero fatalities" by the year 2000.
These included special emphasis programs in the areas of enforcement of mine safety and health rules, hazard awareness, and miner training in addition to rulemaking activities.
Subjects of special attention included efforts to concentrate the resources of government, industry, and labor on eliminating conditions and acts that can contribute to mine explosions or fires and reducing dangers in certain high-hazard occupations, types of mining or geographical areas.
In addition, MSHA broadened its probe into dust sample tampering by coal operators into a wide-ranging and comprehensive investigation in cooperation with the Department of Justice.
Certain ongoing safety and health programs were strengthened during 1991, such as the all-industry campaign against substance abuse in the workplace and the use of job safety analysis (JSA) throughout the mining industry.
JSA was an integral part of MSHA's plan to reach zero fatalities by the year 2000, a proven injury reduction technique in which miners and supervisors worked closely to analyze each step in a specific hazardous task and develop the safest possible procedure for accomplishing it.
MSHA produced a nationwide satellite television program featuring JSA.
The National Stone Association and the International Union of Operating Engineers made commitments to use JSA.
In February 1991, MSHA implemented a prototype program to focus increased attention on coal mines with identifiable potential for serious fires or explosions and multiple fatal accidents from fires and explosions.
A special emphasis program was also implemented to address metal and nonmetal mines having the potential for serious injuries or fatalities due to special geological environment, special operating conditions, or the possibility of unplanned release of hazardous chemicals.
Twenty three-mines and mills participated in the program.
MSHA continued a hazard alert program for both coal and metal and nonmetal, which included distribution of illustrations of the sites of the fatalities that occurred in order to call attention to the specific types of accidents that were happening at the time.
Another important new program implemented during this fiscal year was the effort to identify mines with an "excessive history of violaticns" of MSHA's rules, based on the number of citations for violations a company receives in a specific time period.
Nearly 17 percent of the violations assessed and over ten percent of the mines were affected by this program.
A special assistant to the assistant secretary continued to work closely with industry, State, and labor representatives to reduce accidents in certain mining States which have historically accounted for a disproportionate share of coal mining deaths and disabling injuries.
Joint MSHA/State mine assistance programs were developed in each of the States.
The programs received support and praise from the mining industry and labor.
The initiative to combat illegal coal mining continued through this fiscal year.
Through the cooperative enforcement efforts of the MSHA task force and the Department of Justice, the Department of Treasury, the Environmental Protection Agency, and various State agencies, the illegal mining problem in eastern Kentucky was virtually eliminated.
Seven illegal mine operators were successfully prosecuted.
Four defendants were awaiting trial on charges of operating 27 illegal coal mines.
In cooperation with the Justice Department, MSHA conducted a wide-ranging and comprehensive investigation into dust sampling fraud.
The probe started when an MSHA laboratory technician found signs of tampering in dust samples submitted by coal operators.
The tampering was in the form of "abnormal white centers" where dust was removed after the sample was taken.
In January 1991, Peabody Coal Company pled guilty to criminal violations of respirable dust sampling requirements and paid a criminal penalty of $500,000.
In April 1991, MSHA issued nearly 5,000 civil citations and over $6.5 million in civil penalties to the operators of about 850 coal mines for submitting dust samples with signs of tampering.
Further investigations into dust sampling fraud were continuing.
Additionally, MSHA was moving to require use of a tamperresistant cassette for taking respirable dust samples.
Including the citations and assessments for the "abnormal white centers," the agency assessed mine operators civil penalties a total of $25.3 million for 146,313 violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act and of mandatory safety and health standards.
This was a 41 percent increase over FY 1990.
MSHA continued to implement a comprehensive substance abuse awareness program directed at publicizing the fact that anyone can be the victim of an alcohol or drug abuser.
Working jointly with the Mining Industry Committee on Substance Abuse as well as by utilizing other Departmental resources, additional educational materials were developed and distributed.
Under a special program that received wide industry acceptance, metal and nonmetal inspectors issued over 1,700 noncompliance notices to mining operations which were opening for the first time, resuming operations, opening new areas, or installing new equipment.
Under this program, a citation was issued during the next regular inspection if the noted condition was not corrected.
Coal mining fatalities decreased during the year to 56, compared with 67 deaths in fiscal year 1990.
Injuries at coal mining operations also decreased to a rate of 10.38 per 200,000 work-hours during FY 1991 from 10.51 in fiscal year 1990.
In metal and nonmetal mining, 47 fatalities occurred during fiscal year 1991, down from 52 fatalities the previous fiscal year.
This was a record low number of fatalities.
The all-injury rate in metal and nonmetal mining decreased to 6.62 per 200,000 workhours in FY 1991 from 6.97 in FY 1990.
During FY 1991, measures were taken to improve day-to-day accountability of MSHA managers and employees for actions that affect safety and health of miners.
MSHA published final rules involving safety standards for explosives at metal and nonmetal mines; rules of practice for petitions for modification of mandatory safety standards; information collection requirements related to mine rescue equipment, self-rescuer examinations, fire drills, and first-aid training for supervisory employees; and safety standards for explosives and blasting in underground coal mines.
Other regulatory health and safety topics under review during FY 1991 included proposals on training and retraining of miners; electric cables, signaling cables, and cable splice kits; hazard communication; criteria and procedures for proposed assessment of civil penalties; and electric motor assemblies.
Advances in safety and health technology and mining methods continued in mine roof control, underground ventilation, fireresistant materials, numerical modeling for pillar design, and other areas.
Also, master agreements for reciprocal product testing were approved for negotiation by the State Department.
Implementation was expected to begin in the next fiscal year in the United Kingdom and Poland.
There were 1,810 underground coal mines and 2,522 surface coal mines and facilities under the jurisdiction of MSHA's Coal Mine Safety and Health (Coal) organization during fiscal year 1991.
Coal personnel conducted 45,751 safety and health inspections and investigations, including 4,426 education and training activities at mine sites.
It also issued 112,597 citations and orders to coal mine operators and independent contractors working at the mines for violations of health or safety rules.
At the request of mine operators and miners' representatives, MSHA supervisors held 2,521 health and safety conferences to discuss the results of mine inspections.
The Coal organization's work force consisted of 1,430 employees in FY 1991, including 769 coal mine inspectors and 96 specialized enforcement and engineering staff.
Coal mine safety and health managers, inspectors, technical specialists, and education and training specialists operated from 10 district offices, 17 subdistrict offices, and 72 field locations throughout the country.
There were 35 MSHA health and safety training specialists stationed in district and field offices to aid mining companies in their education and training programs.
Fifty-six coal miners died in accidents on the job during FY 1991, down from 67 in FY 1990.The fatal incidence rate in coal mining for FY 1991 was .04 deaths per 200,000 employee workhours, a decrease from the previous fiscal year.
The rate for all types of injuries in coal mining was 10.38 injuries per 200,000 work-hours (excluding office workers), down from 10.51 injuries in FY 1990.
Coal mining industry employment (excluding office workers) decreased to 154,346 at the end of FY 1991 down from 161,338 in FY 1990.
Nearly 5,000 citations were issued to about 850 coal mines for alleged tampering with dust samples.
Penalties for these violations total $6.5 million, the largest aggregate fine in MSHA history.
After issuance of the citations, MSHA continued to conduct civil and criminal investigations of allegations of fraud and improper conduct related to dust sampling, and initiated several actions to review the dust sampling program.
A special enforcement unit continued its efforts to combat illegal coal mining operations in Kentucky and elsewhere.
The objective of this unit was to identify unregistered illegal mining operations and to pursue criminal prosecutions of persons involved where appropriate.
The unit also investigated those mining operations which were willfully and repeatedly in violation of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act.
Through a cooperative effort with the Department of Justice, the Department of Treasury, the Environmental Protection Agency and various state agencies, the illegal mining problem in eastern Kentucky was virtually eliminated.
During 1991, the work of the special enforcement unit led to the successful prosecution of seven illegal mine operators, either through plea agreements with the government or through jury trial.
One operator received the largest prison sentence ever handed down for a criminal violation related to mining; i.e., 65 months to be served, followed by three years of supervised probation.
Four defendants were awaiting trial on charges of operating 27 illegal coal mines.
MSHA investigated 131 complaints of safety and health related discrimination that coal miners filed with MSHA during the fiscal year.
MSHA opened 210 investigations into possible "knowing and willful" violations of coal mine safety and health regulations.
The Coal Mine Safety and Health organization referred 20 investigations for possible criminal prosecution and 73 cases for civil penalty assessments against 147 individuals.
In February 1991, MSHA announced a program to focus attention on coal mines with compliance characteristics similar to mines that have methane explosives and multiple fatal accidents involving explosives.
The mine selection process considered all mines in the above group that liberated more than 50,000 cubic feet of methane per day as well as those that routinely used explosives during the regular mining cycle.
The final selection resulted in 44 mines identified for this "special emphasis" program.
This program encouraged the individual mine operator to develop a mine specific program to reduce violations and required the MSHA district to develop a program of enforcement applicable to the mine.
The Coal Mine Safety and Health organization's accountability activity for FY 1991, a transition year into the new program, included reviews of eight offices by headquarters personnel.
As a result, improvements were made in a number of enforcement areas.
MSHA's Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health organization continued initiatives to promote mine safety and health at 315 underground mines and 10,827 surface mines, quarries, sand and gravel operations, and mineral mills during the 1991 fiscal year.
These operations produced over 72 different mineral materials, including gold, silver, zinc, copper, iron, uranium, limestone, potash, and sand and gravel.
As of the end of FY 1991, metal and nonmetal mine inspectors operated from six districts throughout the country, 47 field offices, and seven field stations.The metal and nonmetal work force consisted of 511 employees, 347 of whom were mine inspectors and investigators.
There were 47 fatalities at metal and nonmetal operations during FY 1991, down from 57 during the previous fiscal year.
A record low number of fatalities was achieved in FY 1991.
The fatal incidence rate for FY 1991 was .02 per 200,000 employee work-hours.
Injuries at metal and nonmetal mining operations decreased to a rate of 6.62 per 200,000 work-hours in FY 1991 from 6.97 in FY 1990.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors conducted 17,296 complete regular inspections at operations nationwide during FY 1991.
The organization conducted another 239 investigations in response to complaints about hazards from miners or their representatives.
There were 174 accident investigations during the 1991 fiscal year, including investigations of all fatal accidents.
For the third consecutive year, special emphasis was given to auditing both mine operators' and MSHA's records to ensure operators accurately report their accident, injury, and employment figures to the Agency and maintain proper records.
A total of 2,641 audits were conducted during FY 1991 compared to 2,658 during FY 1990 and 2,485 during FY 1989.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors issued 47,253 compliance citations and orders for violations of safety and health rules during FY 1991.
The largest category of citations, about 40 percent of the total, was for violations of MSHA's rules for the use of equipment.
At the request of mine operators and miners' representatives, supervisory mine inspectors held 586 health and safety conferences to discuss the citations and orders issued by enforcement personnel.
About 35 percent of all violations cited in fiscal 1991 were designated as "significant and substantial."
These violations were considered likely to result in a reasonably serious injury or illness, and they usually entailed higher penalties than other violations.
As a result of the compliance orders and citations issued, metal and nonmetal mine inspectors conducted 6,984 compliance follow-up inspections to check for the correction of previously cited violations.
During FY 1991, 90 petitions for modifications of mandatory safety standards under section 101(c) of the Mine Act were processed.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors and training specialists made 425 visits to mine sites to advise on and evaluate the effectiveness of training and safety programs.MSHA investigations of discrimination complaints brought by miners decreased from 59 cases in FY 1990 to 42 cases in FY 1991.
Investigations were completed on 48 alleged discrimination cases.
There were 203 new cases of possible "knowing and willful" violations of safety or health rules by mine operators filed for investigation in FY 1991.
There were 202 investigations completed regarding such violations.
Inspectors and specialists also made 2,374 visits to mines and mills during the fiscal year for other types of compliance activities.
Metal and nonmetal mine safety and health personnel were active in the field of health particularly with standards development and enforcement support.
In the area of standards development, metal and nonmetal industrial hygienists played important roles at public hearings held on the proposed air quality standard as well as in the development of standards on hazard communication, noise, diesel particulate, and confined spaces.
Metal and nonmetal personnel also initiated a special study on the hazards of silica flour operations.
This study involved both an internal task force and a joint study with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
During FY 1991, metal and nonmetal specialists issued a Health Inspection Procedures Handbook which listed sampling methods for many contaminants for the first time.
This Handbook was made publicly available, and it was well received by the mining industry.
The Metal and Nonmetal organization placed emphasis on special initiatives aimed at improving safety conditions in the mines and reducing accidents.
One such activity was the implementation of a special emphasis program directed at operations that meet the criteria of having the "potential for serious injuries or fatalities due to special geological environment, special operating conditions, or the possibility of unplanned release of hazardous chemicals."
During FY 1991, 23 mines and mills participated in the program.
The compliance assistance visits (CAVs) program continued to provide mining operations with special assistance in complying with safety and health standards.
As resources permitted, inspectors conducted CAVs at mine operators' requests which primarily involved mines and mills that were opening for the first time.
During a CAV, the inspectors issue notices (non-assessable citations) for potential violations of health and safety standards.
If the noted condition is not corrected, acitation is issued during the next regular inspection.
In FY 1991, inspectors made 279 visits and issued 1,793 non-assessable citations.
The greatest number of these citations were issued at sand and gravel operations.
Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health continued to distribute fatalgrams to the mining industry in an effort to keep industry personnel constantly on the alert and conscious of the need for safe work practices in order to avoid injury.
Thirty-one fatalgrams were distributed to mine operators during FY 1991.
Also in FY 1991, metal and nonmetal mine safety and health specialists issued program information bulletins on fatal accidents for calendar years 1978 - 1990 and on lost workdays accidents for calendar years 1980 - 1990.
These bulletins contained statistics on fatal and serious accidents and were distributed to mine operators to apprise them of the areas with the most critical need for safety awareness and planning.
Metal and nonmetal mine safety and health personnel continued to assist regional and local mine rescue associations in improving team skills, increasing the number of trained teams available for emergency duties, and promoting effective, uniform rescue procedures.
During the fiscal year, a total of 190 engineering design plans for impoundments to contain mine wastes were reviewed.
Also, Technical Support personnel conducted 585 in-mine and field investigations during the fiscal year to gauge or examine toxic materials, harmful dust, excessive noise, poisonous gases, electrical hazards, explosives and hoisting problems, and a number of other problems which might affect miner safety or health.
Most of the investigations resulted in recommendations for correcting hazardous conditions or environments which could lead to safety and health problems for miners.
MSHA technicians processed more than 96,100 respirable coal dust samples as part of the agency's program to ensure that mine operators comply with dust control standards to reduce the possibility of miners developing coal workers' pneumoconiosis or "black lung."
Technical Support worked with coal mine safety and health and Department of Justice personnel in a study concerning coal companies tampering with respirable dust samples.
In May 1991, MSHA established an interagency task force to consider the role of the individual miner in the sampling program, to examine the feasibility of MSHA conducting all sampling, and to consider the development of new or improved monitoring technology which includes technology to continuously monitor the mine environment.
The task group was also asked to analyze different sampling strategies and to provide recommendations regarding the frequency of sampling and whether operators should continue to conduct sampling.
Technical Support's engineers and technicians were active in several of the task group teams.
The final report and recommendations were expected to be issued in FY 1992.
Approximately 76,500 mine atmospheric samples of potentially hazardous airborne substances and gases were analyzed at Technical Support laboratories.
These included quartz, silica, elemental and other types of analyses.
Such analyses supported physical and chemical analytical enforcement activities and contributed to solving health and safety problems.
During FY 1991, technical support personnel processed 2,540 mining product approval actions which included 573 audits to assure the safety of equipment for use in mines.
About 155,400 accident-injury and employment reports were processed during the fiscal year.
Pennsylvania deep mine hoists and elevators.
The requirement was scheduled to become effective December 1, 1991.
MSHA expected to continue providing support for the testing of these new braking systems as they are installed on mine hoists and elevators.
Technical Support designed, developed, and tested a fireresistant compressible squeeze block composed of cellulosic material for use in underground mine stoppings where convergent conditions are experienced.
Significant advances were made in the field of numerical modeling for pillar design.
These modeling techniques assist in the design of more stable pillars and openings.
Technical Support conducted a study to evaluate the effects of roof stability for extended-cut mining.
The results were being used in the development of a procedures manual for remote control, extended-cut mining.
Two master agreements for reciprocal product testing were approved for negotiation by the State Department.
Implementation was expected to begin in FY 1992 with the Health and Safety Executive, United Kingdom and the Central Mining Institute of Poland.
Technical Support developed a new agency policy to implement service life plans on respirators used in underground mining.
Under this policy, the useable life of these devices was defined.
This was designed to eliminate the age-related problems of the devices in use.
Close relations among MSHA and the mine safety and health research agencies, particularly the Bureau of Mines, continued in FY 1991.
The final report of the SR-100 Person-Wearable Self-Rescuer Task Force, a joint MSHA-Bureau of Mines project, was published in February 1991.
Meetings between the two agencies were held during the fiscal year to review and evaluate research findings and discuss new technical projects.
The Mine Emergency Operations Unit responded to the fire at the Mathies Mine on October 17, 1990, and continued to support the investigation and recovery operations until April 1991.
In addition, the mobile gas analysis laboratory was used to conduct 4,200 on-site analyses at the Mathies Mine fire.
In order to facilitate mine fire gas analyses, Technical Support developed and brought on line an automated gas analysis system capable of processing 200 gas samples unattended.
Technical specialists assisted in the investigations of the fatal explosion at the Fire Creek, Inc., No. 1 Mine in McDowell County, West Virginia.
Assistance was also provided in the investigation of the methane explosion which injured 10 miners at the Golden Eagle Coal Mine in Weston, Colorado.
Methane ignition investigations were conducted at the Eddy Potash Inc., mine in Carlsbad, New Mexico, and the Cannon Gold Mine in Wenatchee, Washington.
The investigations required specialized sampling and analytical techniques to determine the source, composition, and flammability characteristics of the gases that ignited.
Technical support personnel continued to supply the MSHA inspectorate with the latest toxicological information on the hazards of exposure to chemicals and gases.
This was partly accomplished by maintaining an on-line computer file which cross-referenced many material safety data sheets for chemicals used on mine properties.
Furthermore, a file was maintained of all noise exposures reported by coal mine inspectors.
By analyzing these data, trends can be detected so limited resources can be directed to the greatest need.
The MSHA Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances continued its ongoing regulatory review program.
On October 1, 1990, MSHA published a proposed rule on electric cables, signaling cables, and cable splice kits which implements new procedures for the testing and approval of electric cables.
On November 2, 1990, MSHA published a proposed rule on hazard communication which requires mine operators to: assess the hazards of chemicals they produce or use; provide information to their employees concerning chemical hazards; and train employees about chemical hazards.
On December 28, 1990, MSHA published a proposed rule on criteria and procedures for proposed assessment of civil penalties.
The rule revised procedures for proposing civil penalties under the 1977 Mine Act, implemented the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, and reflected changes in inflation by including across-the-board increases for all categories of penalties.
On December 28, 1990, MSHA published a final rule on rules of practice for petitions for modification of mandatory safety standards which adds time frames for consideration of petitions On January 14, 1991, MSHA published a final rule on information collection requirements for mine rescue equipment tests and examinations, self-rescuer examinations, fire drills, and first-aid training for supervisory employees.
The rule ensures that the information collection requirements have practical utility.
On January 18, 1991, MSHA published a final rule on safety standards for explosives at metal and nonmetal mines to become effective March 19, 1991.
However, MSHA subsequently stayed specific provisions of the final rule until October 1, 1992, and reopened the rulemaking record on them.
In addition, MSHA extended the effective date of the remainder of the rule until November 1, 1991.
On March 12, 1991, MSHA published a proposed rule on electric motor assemblies which establishes specific requirements for MSHA approval of certain explosion-proof electric motor assemblies used in underground mines.
On September 24, 1991, MSHA published proposed revisions to its existing rule on training and retraining of miners to require training for certain supervisors who are not covered and provide more appropriate training for newly employed experienced miners.
Other regulatory topics under review during the fiscal year included rulemaking concerning confined spaces, a permissible exposure limit for diesel particulates, ventilation in underground coal mines, and noise.
MSHA planned to continue work on standards for improved air quality, diesel-powered equipment for underground coal mines, and high-voltage longwall equipment.
Educational Policy and Development (EPD) continued to develop, monitor, and evaluate health and safety training programs for the mining industry.
During FY 1991, the MSHA State Grants Program disbursed $5.8 million to 46 States and the Navajo Nation for use in developing and conducting mine health and safety education and training programs.
An estimated 146,000 miners were trained using the resources of this program.
EPD specialists continued with a revision of the existing Title 30 CFR Part 48.
The proposed changes essentially would: revise the definition of "miner" to include all supervisory personnel in order to address the disproportionate number of injuries and fatalities involving supervisors; revise the definition of "experienced miner" to mean a miner who has had one year of mining experience; strengthen the training for experienced miners, including supervisory personnel; and remove or revise certain coal mine training requirements in Part 75 and 77 of 30 CFR which are already covered under Part 48.
This proposed amendment to Part 48 was to be open for public comment until January 1992.
EPD led several significant agency initiatives.
One initiative was to promote the use of Job Safety Analysis (JSA) in the mining industry.
JSA is a proven accident prevention technique through which miners, foremen, and supervisors are able to work together to identify hazards and develop step-by-step procedures that serve as a blueprint for performing jobs in the safest, most effective manner.
EPD personnel were instrumental in establishing the JSA stecring committee comprised of industry, labor, and government representatives.
The National Stone Association adopted MSHA's goal of "zero fatalities by the year 2000" and the International Union of Operating Engineers was using JSA in their apprentice training program.
These organizations made a commitment to use JSA because they felt it was one of the best ways to reduce accidents and injuries.
As part of this initiative, EPD produced a nationwide satellite television program featuring JSA.
This broadcast included a panel of industry safety leaders and a presentation of JSA success stories as told by miners.
JSA was one of several accident prevention programs being used by the mining industry, and was an integral part of the agency's plan to reach the goal of "zero fatalities by the year 2000."
A second major agency initiative was substance abuse awareness.
EPD was responsible for the development and implementation of an education and training program designed to address substance abuse in the workplace.
Prior to FY 1991, EPD specialists assisted in the formation of a joint industry, labor, and government steering committee called the Mining Industry Committee on Substance Abuse (MICSA).
The substance abuse initiative was a result of increasing national awareness and concern about the problems associated with substance abuse.
The goal of EPD and MICSA was to educate miners and management about the seriousness of the substance abuse problem, and to eliminate alcohol and drug abuse as the cause of accidents, injuries, and fatalities in the Nation's mining industry.
MSHA developed and was implementing a comprehensive substance abuse program directed at publicizing the fact that anyone can be the victim of an alcohol or drug abuser.
The theme of MSHA's program was: "Buddies Don't Let Buddies Work Impaired - Substance Abuse Hurts Everyone."
EPD and MICSA jointly developed a new pamphlet, entitled "Coping with Substance Abuse in Mining."
This pamphlet, along with another booklet produced by DOL entitled An Employer's Guide to Dealing with Substance Abuse, was being distributed throughout the mining industry.
During the last quarter of FY 1991, EPD implemented a Small Mines Training Initiative (SMTI) to work in concert with the Joint MSHA/state mine assistance program.
This three-year pilot program was designed to reduce accidents and fatalities that occur in small mines.
The major focus of this program was the four State region of Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and West Virginia, in which the mining industry has consistently experienced the highest accident rate.
The SMTI was to be operational in FY 1992, with EPD and Coal personnel providing training to small mine operators and their employees.
This training was to include JSA, other accident prevention programs, and substance abuse.
Additional training programs were also to be designed to help the small mine operators.
During the year, EPD personnel also provided support to the Holmes Safety Association (HSA), a national voluntary organization consisting of individuals from management, labor, and government dedicated to preventing fatalities and injuries in the mining industry.
The association recognizes individuals and companies for working safcly in the mining industry and provides safety information to its 7,000 members through the HSA Bulletin.
MSHA's Office of Assessments assessed civil penalties for 146,313 violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act and of mandatory safety and health standards.
Total penalties assessed were $25.3 million, a 41 percent increase over the previous year.
Included in these totals were 4,557 citations issued for tampering with coal dust samples, which accounted for $6.5 million of the total assessed.
The excessive history program, which increased civil penalties for violations cited at mines determined to have an excessive history of violations, affected 16.9 percent of the violations assessed and 10.4 percent of the mines.
This increase from 7.5 percent of the violations and 33 percent of the penalties assessed in FY 1990 was due in part to the assessment of the dust sample tampering violations.
Also of significance, the number of violations assessed against mine management officials increased from 248 in FY 1990 to 556 in FY 1991.
Mine operators requested hearings with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on 13,444 or 9.5 percent of the violations (excluding the dust sample tampering violations) during fiscal 1991, an increase of 122 percent over FY 1990 requests.
This increase was largely attributable to the excessive history program.
With the dust sample tampering violations included, 17,543 violations or 12 percent were contested.
MSHA continued its aggressive efforts to collect delinquent civil penalties for violations.
This was primarily through the use of knowledgeable MSHA collections staff at headquarters and key mining areas and emphasizing both increased personal negotiation and support for litigation, where warranted.
This effort enabled the government to collect almost $1 million in delinquent penalties during the 1991 fiscal year.
The agency also considered and negotiated installment plans for certain mine operators claiming an inability to pay the full amounts owed at one time.
A total of $13.2 million in civil penalties was collected in FY 1991.
During Fiscal Year 1991, the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) undertook several key initiatives to further strengthen and protect employee benefit plans under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) and the Federal Employees' Retirement System Act (FERSA).
These included: a major legislative initiative to expand retirement coverage to more working Americans and improve pension portability, record-breaking ERISA enforcement activity, and an agency-wide effort to protect the benefits of participants and beneficiaries whose pensions are provided in the form of annuity contracts.
The agency also worked with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) on its revised ERISA audit guide to assist the employee benefit community with reporting and disclosure compliance.
During the year, PWBA oversaw the management of 5.5 million private sector pension and welfare benefit plans with more than $2 trillion in assets.
During FY 1991, PWBA was highly successful in addressing the goals of the program's enforcement and oversight function.
The agency's civil and criminal investigations produced a record $178.6 million in recoveries for employee benefit plans.
Of this amount, $116.4 million was recovered through voluntary compliance and $62.2 million through litigation.
The agency also had a record number of judicial actions with 119 civil cases referred for litigation and 35 individuals indicted for criminal violations of ERISA.
A major area of concern during the year involved safeguarding the retirement benefits of workers whose benefits were backed by certain annuities.
Three lawsuits were filed involving over $100 million in pension assets alleging that fiduciaries improperly selected and purchased group annuity contracts to fund retirement benefits from Executive Life Insurance Company of California.
The lawsuits alleged improper selection of Executive Life as the provider of the annuities.
Finally, under PWBA's reporting enforcement program, more than $5.5 million in civil penalties was assessed.
This program was designed to assure the greatest possible compliance with ERISA's annual reporting requirements.
PWBA developed a legislative initiative proposed by the Secretary that would expand the retirement income security of 42 million full-time American workers currently without pension coverage.
In April, Secretary Martin unveiled the Pension Opportunities for Workers'Expanded Retirement ("POWER") proposal.
The proposal would establish a new pension program designed for small businesses, allow tax-exempt organizations and local and state governments to establish 401(k) retirement plans and simplify the rules for pension plans.
The proposal also would shorten the 10-year vesting requirement for multiemployer plans to five years and create incentives to encourage employees to save the lump sum payments they receive upon leaving a job.
The Department worked with the Treasury Department and Congress on pending pension simplification bills that would incorporate elements of the "POWER" proposal.
PWBA also testified before several congressional committees on its initiative to safeguard workers'retirement benefits that were provided in the form of annuities.In addition, the Secretary transmitted to Congress early in October 1990 a legislative proposal to improve the Department's ERISA enforcement program.
The Administration is continuing to work toward improvements in the law in this area.
The 1991 fiscal year was a very active one in PWBA's regulatory program, especially with regard to the issue of pension annuity providers.
The agency and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) issued advance notices of proposed rulemaking to determine the need for a regulation under ERISA which would establish minimum standards for annuity providers.
The notice invited public comment on methods that would help ensure that participants or beneficiaries covered by annuities receive their promised pension benefits.
Factors addressed in the notice included processes for selecting annuity providers, State regulatory requirements and guaranty programs, and the value of independent ratings organizations.
In its effort to address the related problems caused by the seizure of Executive Life Insurance Company by California regulators, the agency also announced an expedited process for granting administrative exemptions to plans holding Executive Life guaranteed investment contracts (GICs).
Three exemption applications were granted.
As part of its cooperative effort to assist the states in the regulation of multiple employer welfare arrangements (MEWAs), PWBA published a booklet entitled "MEWAs Under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act: A Guide to Federal and State Regulation".
This effort was designed to enhance understanding by State regulatory officials and others of ERISA and the affect of Federal preemption on State MEWA regulatory and enforcement efforts.
Two projects were completed that provided important data concerning various aspects of employee benefit plans.
The first was publication of the book "Pension Policy: An International Perspective," which focused on pension portability, cost of living adjustments for retirees, and the funding and terminations of pension plans in five industrialized nations.
Insurance System: Effects on Workers and Their Families" examined the cost of health care under various options envisioned in the context of a mandated employment-based health insurance system.
According to the study, employmentbased health insurance would significantly increase coverage and reduce the number of uninsured persons; however health insurance could cost employers between $17.3 and $41.8 billion in added premiums and potentially burden small employers.
An ongoing program of the compilation of statistics and analysis of data derived from the Form 5500 series of annual reports also provided an important resource for policymakers and researchers during this period.
Office of Research and Economic Analysis (OREA) staff compiled basic statistics on the 1988 filings and prepared a number of special projects and analyses utilizing this data.
The agency worked extensively with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) to revise its guide for auditing employee benefit plans.
The new guide was issued in March 1991.
The guide provided necessary information for accounting professionals, especially regarding new ERISA regulatory requirements.
The guide incorporated new audit standards dealing with reporting errors, irregularities, and illegal acts.
The agency also made a total of 106 referrals of substandard accounting and auditing work to the AICPA.
PWBA also conducted fiduciary compliance audits of the Thrift Savings Plan as required by the Federal Employees' Retirement System Act (FERSA).
Audit efforts by PWBA were designed to strengthen the security of the more than $10.4 billion in Thrift Savings Plan funds and to maximize earnings on funds invested by Federal workers.
PWBA received more than 127,000 written and telephone inquiries from participants, beneficiaries, employers and other interested parties concerning employee benefits.
Many inquiries were from individuals with specific problems related to obtaining benefits.
PWBA was able to assist employee benefit plan participants in obtaining $3,591,183 in benefits to which they were entitled but were unable to achieve on their own.
A significant portion of telephone inquiries related to questions concerning rights to continued health benefits and employer obligations under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA).
In an effort to increase public awareness of the agency's programs, PWBA issued two new publications, "ERISA 1991 Semi-annual Report on Enforcement Activities" and "Health Benefits Under COBRA," a comprehensive booklet on COBRA rights and obligations.
Three other publications were revised: "The Reporting and Disclosure Guide", "Guide to Summary Plan Description Requirements" and "How to File a Claim for Benefits."
A 1991 update of the "Trouble Shooter's Guide to Filing the Form 5500" was published and distributed in an effort to assist filers in completing their annual reports correctly.
During fiscal year 1991, the Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) continued to emphasize a well-balanced program of enforcement of the civil and criminal provisions of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA), Section 1209 of the Postal Reorganization Act, and the standards of conduct regulations implementing Section 7120 of the Civil Service Reform Act and Section 1017 of the Foreign Service Act.
OLMS placed a similar emphasis on educational and assistance activities designed for union members and others in order to promote greater understanding of, and compliance with, the Acts.
As a result of OLMS investigations, 208 indictments and other criminal actions were returned and 195 convictions and pretrial diversion agreements were obtained in fiscal year 1991.
These were the highest numbers of indictments and convictions achieved by OLMS in any fiscal year since the passage of the LMRDA.
As a result of enforcement actions taken in FY 1991, the courts ordered restitution of $4,144,842 in embezzled funds and imposed fines of $197,679.
OLMS conducted 402 embezzlement investigations in FY 1991 involving all types and sizes of unions throughout the country.
At the end of the fiscal year, 227 criminal cases were pending at the Department of Justice or local prosecutor's offices and 344 cases were pending in OLMS field offices.
In the civil enforcement area, OLMS opened 186 election investigations based on complaints from union members alleging violations of the union officer election provisions of the LMRDA and 24 investigations into potential violations of the LMRDA trusteeship provisions.
Seven of the election complaints involved international or national unions.
Civil action was taken in 28 election cases, while 26 cases were settled by voluntary compliance.
During FY 1991 OLMS continued to conduct compliance audits of international, national, and local labor unions.
Such audits are undertaken primarily to ascertain compliance with the criminal and civil provisions of the LMRDA and to provide compliance assistance to union officials.
OLMS conducts these audits using streamlined procedures under its Compliance Audit (CAP), Large Compliance Audit (L-CAP), and International Compliance Audit (I-CAP) Programs.
I-CAP audits were conducted in eight national and international labor organizations in FY 1991.
The national and international organizations audited had combined annual receipts exceeding $225 million and represented approximately 2.5 million members in more than 13,000 affiliated bodies.
In addition, 884 local union audits were conducted, of which 39, involving local unions with annual receipts of $500,000 or more, were conducted under the first year of the new L-CAP procedure.
These CAP and L-CAP audits revealed numerous civil violations and resulted in 101 embezzlement fallout cases being opened.
Most of the recordkeeping, reporting, and other civil violations discovered as a result of the audits were remedied through voluntary compliance by the unions involved.
In administering the LMRDA reports program in FY 1991, OLMS received and processed more than 59,000 reports filed by unions, union officers and employees, employers, labor relations consultants, and surety companies as required by the LMRDA and related laws.
OLMS opened 87 employer, consultant, and union officer and employee reporting investigations and closed 94 such cases.
OLMS also continued to place emphasis on obtaining delinquent and deficient union financial reports.
To fulfill its disclosure responsibilities, OLMS processed 9,216 requests for disclosure of LMRDA reports, which involved the reproduction of more than 300,000 pages.
The disclosure requests received were equally divided between OLMS field offices and the the National Office.
In FY 1991, OLMS published a new 306-page "Register of Reporting Labor Organizations 1990," which listed the approximately 41,000 national, intermediate, and local labor organizations that file reports required by the LMRDA.
Historical information about unions included in the appendices to the "Register" showed, among other things, that since 1960 Pennsylvania and Ohio continued to rank as the states with the largest number of unions.
In FY 1991 OLMS field offices conducted various types of compliance assistance activities in order to promote voluntary compliance with the LMRDA and to complement OLMS civil and criminal enforcement programs.
Compliance assistance activities included seminars on the provisions of the LMRDA for particular union affiliations or all unions within a geographical area.
Contacts with top level international and national union officials were continued to provide assistance, improve compliance, and promote increased awareness of statutory obligations.
OLMS also responded to more than 80,000 inquiries from union members and officers, Congress, the general public, and others regarding provisions of the LMRDA as well as other issues.
In addition, OLMS distributed a variety of pamphlets that explain LMRDA provisions and the role of OLMS in administering them.
In FY 1991 OLMS continued to place emphasis on the training of its investigators.
OLMS worked to assure that investigators and other staff were best trained to conduct expert audits and investigations to safeguard the rights and funds of America's union members and to provide knowledgeable assistance to help persons affected by the LMRDA understand the law and comply with its provisions.
Publication of a comprehensive training manual and other activities designed to help organizations acquire the skills and behaviors needed to perform in a team-oriented, highperformance work environment highlighted an active year for the Bureau of Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative Programs (BLMRCP).
In addition to expanding a nationwide delivery network of organizations using Bureau-developed materials, BLMRCP executed a two-pronged strategy to help companies and workers facing mass layoffs or plant closings use a variety of cooperative programs intended to ease the transition to retraining or reemployment.
In its efforts to keep the Secretary and other government officials abreast of rapidly changing issues in labor relations and new work systems, the Bureau expanded the scope of its analysis and briefing papers, cultivated new networks of experts and practitioners, and began to create an electronic bulletin board to facilitate information sharing about new work systems and other labor relations issues.
The Bureau continued to administer its statutory employee protection responsibilities under several laws, published a notice effectively ending its activities under the Redwood Employee Protection Act, and extended indefinitely its responsibilities under the Airline Deregulation Act.
During FY 1991 the Bureau expanded the range of workorganization issues it defines, researches, and analyzes to include benchmarking, the impact of new technologies on job structure, innovative compensation systems, and joint health care initiatives.
The Bureau also expanded the breadth and variety of workplace issues covered in its Weekly Report on Significant Activities in Labor-Management Relations, focusing on high-performance organizations, trends and developments in innovative pay arrangements, joint initiatives in work-and-family issues, information on health care issues, and others.
The Cooperative Information Clearinghouse, a computerized database of innovative work-organization initiatives, was updated and expanded in FY 1991; it now contains "best-practice" case descriptions of 400 companies.
The kinds of programs included in the database were broadened to include high-performance work organizations and other workplace innovations.
The Bureau began cultivating networks of experts and practitioners in order to encourage, assist, and accelerate information sharing about the rapidly changing American workplace.
These diverse networks will provide access to significant information from, and experiences of, many professionals and organizations dealing with fundamental workplace and work-organization changes.
Further, the information provided by the networks will help the Bureau guide its clients in shifting to new work systems.
Staff members worked with the Commerce Department, the Department of Labor's Employment and Training Administration and Women's Bureau, and other Federal agencies to advance and diffuse data and relevant innovations regarding high-performance work organizations.
In addition, staff members assisted the Collective Bargaining Forum, Economic Policy Council, the Secretary's Glass Ceiling Initiative, and the Department of Labor Work Force Quality Database.
During FY 91, BLMRCP devoted attention to labor-management relations as a vehicle for constructive change in the public schools.
Effectiveness Training, were used to assist labor-management partners to move forward together.
The Bureau's agreement with Claremont Graduate School to study the spread of cooperative techniques for improving public schools continued into its second and final year.
The Carnegie Corporation of New York, a cofunder, will use the study's findings to further policy development with respect to labormanagement relations in public education.
The Bureau guided various organizations that provide services to workers dealing with mass layoffs or plant closings, building coalitions with the National Governors'Association (NGA), the National Alliance of Business (NAB), the National Association of Area Labor-Management Committees (NALMC), the Human Resources Development Institute (HRDI) of the AFL-CIO, and the Employment and Training Administration.
To assist those organizations, the Bureau used a two-pronged strategy: First, it emphasized educating the local professionals involved in the adjustment process.
In some 30 presentations to industry, labor and community leaders and State dislocated worker unit (SDWU) officials, the Bureau discussed the importance of actively involving key stakeholders-- especially workers-- in the programs intended to ease their transition to retraining or reemployment.
Second, it focused on equipping these professionals with tools to promote this concept and implement programs where feasible.
To this end, the Bureau produced Responding to Layoffs: A Labor-Management Adjustment Committee Can Help and Labor-Management Adjustment Committees: A Handbook for Rapid Response Specialists, which enhance the Bureau's outreach capabilities.
Additionally, the Bureau distributed The Directory of Labor-Management Adjustment Committees in Plant Closings and Mass Layoffs to those in the adjustment field.
Organized by State, the directory lists some 200 committees in various industries and gives the extent of union involvement in each case.
Additionally, the Bureau designed and conducted train-thetrainer programs on establishing labor-management adjustment committees for SDWUs, private industry officials, and service providers.
The training sessions provided participants with the skills necessary both to promote worker involvement and to train workers how to serve on a labor-management adjustment committee (LMAC), if one is established as part of the adjustment/outplacement process.
Participating States included: New York, Montana, Arkansas, New Hampshire, Ohio, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, Georgia, and South Carolina.
Bureau staff developed a tentative model for military downsizings and base closings, based upon effective closings in two States.
Four States have successfully used the model to date.
Field Services.
The Bureau significantly expanded the number of providers in, and the capability of, its delivery network--locally based organizations whose resources the Bureau leverages by training them to use Bureau-developed training materials.
The network enhances the Bureau's ability to deliver information, training, educational programs, and technical assistance to a wider public.
The Bureau provided training in FY 1991 to almost 300 delivery network trainers representing over 150 local resource organizations including the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, State mediation services, university-based labor relations institutes, and area labor-management committees.
These local trainers, in turn, have responded to numerous requests from local labor and management representatives for information and training.
BLMRCP responded to more than 100 requests from local trainers for technical assistance in delivering Bureau-devised training to organizations.
The Bureau increased activities focused on the Federal sector during FY 1991, providing training to the Tennessee Valley Authority and its unions, the Office of Personnel Management and its union, and the Federal Trade Commission and its union.
Of particular note, the Bureau provided training and facilitation assistance to the Department of Labor and Local 12, AFGE, during their negotiations.
The Bureau also conducted Committee Effectiveness Training sessions for approximately 50 trainers from the Department of the Interior to complement its Total Quality Management process.
Public Information.
To assist organizations seeking to strengthen their labor-management relations, implement or improve cooperative programs, or adopt elements of high-performance work organizations, the Bureau published special reports, conference summaries, the first of a new publication series, pamphlets, how-to references, and other information during FY 1991.
Committee Effectiveness Training, a Bureau-produced 750- page training manual designed for trainers helping labormanagement teams improve their skills, was published in FY 1991 by the Government Printing Office (GPO) and distributed widely by the Bureau.
GPO sold its first press run of 500 copies and planned to reprint 1,000 more.
The Bureau also launched a new publication series called Labor-Management Initiatives.
During FY 1991, the Bureau's bimonthly newsletter, Labor Relations Today, continued to report cutting-edge trends in industrial labor-management relations, progressive human resource practices, and workforce reorganization to an international audience of more than 18,000 labor-management relations practitioners.
Further, BLMRCP published the conference summary, Labor-Management Cooperation: 1990 State-of-the-Art Symposium, and a paper authored by the Collective Bargaining Forum, Labor-Management Commitment: A Compact for Change.
Research and Policy Development.
Three Bureau-funded research projects were completed during FY 1991.
One study examines the impact of technological change on labor relations in the arts, entertainment, and electronic media and has resulted in a conference planned for 1992 at which labor and management practitioners will discuss ways to quiet their industries' turbulence.
The Bureau is helping plan the conference.
The second study details and analyzes the experience of Chrysler and the United Auto Workers under their Modern Operating Agreement (MOA).
It is being developed into a shorter version for publication, although it has already generated much interest and has been made available through the National Technical Information Service.
The third study examines the roles of employment security, employee involvement, and training in innovative labormanagement practices.
The project includes six different American organizations'experiences and compares them with those in counterpart Japanese enterprises.
Additionally, the Bureau completed an illustrative clause bulletin of work and family provisions contained in major collective bargaining agreements, which was being readied for publication as the year ended.
The various provisions used for the study were forwarded to the Women's Bureau for its Work and Family Clearinghouse database.
During FY 1991, the Bureau created a small database of collective bargaining provisions on issues such as adoption, child care, compressed work weeks, substance-abuse programs, labormanagement cooperation, and sexual harassment.
BLMRCP examined various legislative proposals on employee protection, parental leave, child care, economic adjustment, and amendments to labor relations laws, among other things.
Staff held memberships on Industrial Relations Research Association's (IRRA) national and local executive boards and on the executive committee of Columbia University's seminar on labor.
BLMRCP led a panel at IRRA spring 1991 meetings on mutual gains bargaining (MGB), and Bureau-sponsored research on MGB was scheduled for a panel presentation during IRRA annual meetings in January 1992.
International Activity.
In March 1991 the Acting Deputy Under Secretary participated in the 21st session of the Working Party on Industrial Relations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
Bureau staff provided briefing material for that meeting and assisted in the Department's preparations for those OECD and International Labor Organization meetings focusing on industrial relations issues.
The Acting Deputy Under Secretary led a delegation to Mexico to discuss quality, productivity, and worker rights issues in preparation for the North American Free Trade Agreement negotiations.
While in Mexico, he also attended a meeting of the Binational Commission.
Throughout the year, BLMRCP provided briefings on Bureau programs in the United States and on industrial relations to foreign visitors and U.S. Foreign Service officers.
BLMRCP helped the Bureau of International Labor Affairs develop various training programs, assisted the International Productivity Service, and participated in the International Labour Office conference on Work Life in Transition.
Statutory Responsibilities.
The Bureau continued to administer its responsibilities under the Urban Mass Transportation Act (UMTA), which requires mass transit projects to be certified by the Secretary of Labor to include "fair and equitable" arrangements to protect employees before the Department of Transportation grants Federal assistance to the projects.
The Bureau certified nearly 1,000 projects during 1991, an increasing number of which addressed new and complex issues under arrangements developed by the parties.
Many other cases required the Secretary to determine the protective arrangements when negotiations did not result in an agreement.
In addition, BLMRCP was developing a certifications catalogue to analyze and annotate significant UMTA certifications and determinations, which included a comprehensive keyword index.
Under Title II of the Redwood National Park Expansion Act, the Bureau processed nine eligibility and appeal determinations and calculated ten pension determinations in FY 1991.
A Notice of Proposed Rulemaking was published in the Federal Register announcing the Bureau's final closeout of any future appeals under the Redwood Employee Protection Program.
The Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) provided substantial support services to the men and women who were mobilized and subsequently demobilized as part of the Persian Gulf war.
The agency's response to significant increases in inquiries and requests for technical assistance clearly demonstrated the resolve and determination of VETS'nationwide to support America's newest veterans.
The agency's Transition Assistance Program realized a substantial increase in operational sites and veterans serviced due, in part, to the beginning of the downsizing of America's standing forces and also in keeping with the agency's planned expansion of this program.
The Transition Assistance Program (TAP) was authorized under P.L. 101-237 as a pilot program located in seven States.
The pilot was established to meet the needs of active duty servicemembers scheduled for separation by offering them job search assistance.
In November 1990, P.L. 101-510 established TAP as a permanent program under Title 10, U.S. Code, to be operated as a partnership with the Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs, with the Department of Labor designated the leadership responsibilities.
The Transition Assistance Program offered a three-day workshop to military personnel within 180 days of separation.
The workshop provided the servicemembers with information on conducting a successful job search, information on career decisionmaking, a realistic evaluation of employability, as well as current occupational and labor market information.
Participants also received information on veterans' benefits.
The Disabled Transition Assistance Program (DTAP) was offered to servicemembers separating with a service-connected disability.
It included an assessment of the job readiness of the separating disabled servicemember as well as the TAP instruction.
The program finished FY 1991 with services offered at 90 sites in 23 States, serving 21,716 veterans.
During 1991, the Nation's largest Reserve component call-up in recent history occurred as part of the Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm national emergency.
Approximately 225,000 Reserve component forces were called to active duty, with approximately one-third serving in the Persian Gulf Theater.
Most of those called to active duty were actually away from their civilian jobs from 30 days to six months, and in some cases even longer.
The successful end to the Persian Gulf conflict brought about a massive demobilization, and an increase in veterans' reemployment rights activity.
The volume of inquiries, questions, and requests for technical assistance increased significantly over the previous year.
In response, VETS implemented a multifaceted media effort directed at informing employers of their responsibilities, as well as encouraging them to facilitate the difficult transition from active duty.
The effort also provided information on responsibilities and rights of Reservists and the role of VETS in mediating disputes.
News releases discussed the rights of Reserve component personnel.
Radio and television interviews and other means available were used to get reemployment rights information to the public.
Key initiatives included radio and television public service announcements and the establishment of a VRR telephone information hotline (1- 800-4422-VET).
A major emphasis was placed on providing briefings by VETS staff at demobilization centers.
Many Reserve component personnel kept their employers informed of their status and availability for return to work, allowing for a smooth transition to the civilian workplace.
During this year, a total of 2,539 Veterans'Reemployment Rights complaints were filed.
Cases closed totalled 2,244.
Of these, 88 percent were closed within 90 days from opening, and 92 percent within a 120 days from opening the case.
During 1991, Congress responded to the needs of Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm personnel by strengthening or clarifying portions of the VRR law.
This included clarification of the right of returning military personnel to immediate coverage under employer sponsored health insurance for themselves and their families and the addition of a new section to the VRR law that required employers to make reasonable accommodations and provide retraining for disabled persons being reinstated to their civilian jobs.
A proposal for a comprehensive new law, developed by an interagency task force led by the Department of Labor and Department of Defense, was submitted to Congress.
The proposal, substantially adopted as the House version of the U.S. Employment and Reemployment Rights Act, would simplify and clarify the entire law.
The Senate version also incorporated substantive parts of the Administration bills, but differed in several areas from the original proposal.
Grants awarded to 15 cities and two rural areas in FY 1990 were continued for an additional year with FY 1991 funds authorized under Section 738 of the Stewart B. McKinney Act.
The program focused on assisting homeless veterans to secure employment and reenter the labor force.
Projects enrolled about 4,000 homeless veterans, of whom about 2,000 were placed in jobs.
The Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) Title IV-C program continued to provide specialized employment and training services to Vietnam era, special disabled and recently separated veterans.
Programs and services were targeted to those veterans populations experiencing the greatest unemployment; i.e., special disabled, Vietnam theater and minority veterans.
The program emphasized services and activities which directly contribute to the development of marketable work skills and prepare unemployed veterans for a more highly competitive labor market, through onthe-job training, classroom training, remedial education and work experience, in order to obtain long term employment and achieve economic self-sufficiency.
Eighty percent of the $9,119,000 appropriation for Title IV-C was allocated directly to the States.
The remaining 20 percent consisted of discretionary funds used to support special projects which demonstrate unique and cost-effective forms of training, research or pilot projects of benefit to JTPA IV-C eligible veterans.
Approximately 5,000 eligible veterans participated during the program year, of which 3,265 were placed in employment.
In FY 1991, State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs) from all 50 States, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and the District of Columbia submitted applications for Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP)/Local Veterans'Employment Representative (LVER) grants.
The DVOP/LVER grant provided the SESAs funds to support approximately 1,883 DVOP specialists and 1,600 LVER staff positions.
The SESAs, with the assistance of the DVOP specialist and LVERs, provided priority employment and training service to veterans.
In addition to direct job referral of veterans, the DVOP/LVER staff provided career counseling, vocational guidance assistance, labor market information, job development assistance, referral to supportive services, job search workshops and referral to vocational training.
Through outreach efforts, DVOP specialist staff around the country are responsible for assuring that veterans in need of Federally funded veterans' programs are identified and receive appropriate assistance.
Many of the DVOP specialists and LVERs provide direct services and support to veterans seeking employment and training assistance through the Homeless Veterans' Reintegration Project (HVRP), Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), especially Title IV-C, and the Transition Assistance Program (TAP).
There was a substantial increase in services provided veterans this year.During this year, SESAs experienced a five percent increase in the number of applicants and, similarly, veteran applicants increased by four percent.
Twenty percent of the veteran registrants were either placed or obtained employment during the year.
SESAs registered about two and a half million veterans, and 500,038 were placed or obtained employment through their assistance.
Activities during FY 1991 included several changes in the Federal Contractor Program.
First, the process of distributing, receiving, telephonically responding to questions and compiling reports relative to contractor obligations to submit VETS-100 reports was moved from a private contractor to the State of Alabama.
This was a trouble-free endeavor and the summary reports of contractors who reported and those who didn't were received on time and forwarded to Regional Administrators for Veterans' Employment and Training for distribution to the State agencies.
Increased efforts by the Office of Federal Contractor Compliance Programs (OFCCP) to inform contractors of their responsibilities to report and follow up to the OASVET with lists of those in noncompliance provided for contact with the contractors.
Veterans representation in reporting contractor workforces showed increases in Special Disabled and Vietnam Era categories.
During Fiscal Year 1991, the Office of the Solicitor (SOL) provided legal counsel to the Secretary and other Department officials regarding activities under more than 130 Federal labor laws and regarding other activities undertaken by the Department to promote the welfare of American workers.
Such counsel included coordinating the legislative program of the Department, and reviewing and commenting on proposed regulations to ensure consistency with applicable law and department-wide goals.
In addition, our attorneys provided a full range of legal services with regard to rulemaking proceedings.
They advised program administrators regarding the use of methods such as public education and technical assistance to encourage voluntary compliance before taking enforcement action, and, when appropriate, vigorously pursued litigation regarding the Department's programs through litigation before Federal courts and administrative tribunals.
With regard to the Department's enforcement program, our attorneys were heavily involved in litigation concerning charges that more than 500 coal mine operators altered or tampered with respirable dust samples.
This litigation involved approximately 5000 separate violations for tampering at more than 800 mines throughout the country.
As of the end of the fiscal year, we had filed 4500 civil citations with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission related solely to the tampered dust samples, and our work with the Department of Justice had resulted in criminal charges against over 30 firms for submitting fraudulent dust samples.
SOL attorneys assisted the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in vigorous program enforcement through its penalty enhancement program under which citations are issued on a violation-by-violation basis.
We have participated actively in the pre-citation review process and the formal settlement process, and we have been successful in obtaining corporate-wide abatement in cases involving multi-plant employers.
Such cases included the explosion cases of Phillips 66, OSHRC Docket No. 90-1549, CITGO Petroleum Corporation, OSHA Insp.
No. 110416880, and ARCO Chemical, OSHA Insp.
No. 110318540.
Attorneys in the National and Regional Offices referred a record number of cases to the Department of Justice for criminal prosecution under the Occupational Safety and Health Act during the fiscal year.
In addition, SOL undertook vigorous enforcement of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 by instituting litigation in three States arising out of the failure of Executive Life Insurance Company, which had been providing annuities to pension plan retirees.
Similarly, aggressive enforcement action was taken under the Fair Labor Standards Act against restaurant chains and grocery stores for child labor violations.
SOL attorneys provided legal counsel during a variety of rulemaking proceedings during the fiscal year, including, for example, the promulgation of proposed, interim final and final regulations under the Fair Labor Standards Act (including child labor), the Immigration Act of 1990, the Employee Polygraph Protection Act, the Mine Safety and Health Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, and the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.
Our attorneys also provided legal counsel and support for activities undertaken by the Secretary and other officials of the Department to foster the welfare of American workers.
For example, attorneys advised and assisted the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) regarding its "Glass Ceiling Initiative."
SOL attorneys worked in furtherance of the Secretary's initiative regarding women in nontraditional jobs by assisting OFCCP and the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training in developing, implementing, and carrying out a framework for sharing responsibility for equal opportunity in apprenticeship programs.
In furtherance of the Secretary's goal of making the Department a model workplace, our attorneys provided legal assistance to the Secretary's Sexual Harassment Task Force.
SOL attorneys provided legal counsel to the Bureau of International Labor Affairs with regard to a number of activities, such as the negotiations for a North American Free Trade Agreement, the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, and the possible ratification of international human rights conventions.
The Office of the Solicitor provided extensive assistance to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) in the area of standards development and promulgation, including participation in lengthy and complex rulemaking hearings, drafting and review of Federal Register notices, and analysis of rulemaking records.
Notices of proposed rulemakings published during FY 91 include proposals on motor vehicle safety, grain handling, formaldehyde, process safety management (PSM), and methylene chloride.
In addition, SOL attorneys have been participating in ongoing rulemaking activities on proposed rules, such as bloodborne pathogens, asbestos, methylenedianiline (MDA), glycol ethers, butadiene, cadmium, formaldehyde, lead, hazard communication, permissible exposure limit updates (PELs) date for construction, and safety standards on hazardous waste training programs, confined spaces, shipyard standards, electric power generation, vehicle safety, and logging.
SOL attorneys provided legal services on OSHA-related legislative initiatives, State Plans, Federal Agency Safety and Health Programs, and intergovernmental affairs, including: a victims'rights bill, the Comprehensive OSHA Reform Act, and implementation of OSHA's responsibilities under the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990.
As a result of the explosion and fire at the Imperial Poultry Plant in Hamlet, North Carolina, we devoted considerable time to preparation for subsequent congressional hearings and implementation of State Plan evaluations, including monitoring of the North Carolina plan and asserting concurrent federal jurisdiction over certain defined areas.
With regard to our non-litigative support of OSHA programs, we estimated that SOL attorneys provided approximately 5,800 legal opinions and concluded 18 regulatory projects during the course of fiscal year 1991.
Our attorneys have continued to provide OSHA with litigation support in the U.S. courts of appeals and district courts.
We estimated that our attorneys concluded over 8,900 litigation matters regarding occupational safety and health during the fiscal year.
We convinced the Court that application of the OSH Act to a sawmill owned and operated by an Indian tribe is not barred by the tribe's treaty with the United States.
Dole v. Warm Springs Forest Products Industries, 935 F.2d 182 (9th Cir. 1991).
And in United Steelworkers v. St. Joe Resources, 916 F.2d 294 (5th Cir. 1990), the Court agreed with us that the Commission is empowered to order back pay for employees who have been denied medical removal protection benefits in the past.
We completed briefing in the Air Contaminants Standard case, handled a number of procedural motions filed therein, and have now settled a majority of the 20 separate challenges.
AFL-CIO v. OSHA, 11th Cir.
No. 89-7185 and consolidated cases.
In a case involving industry and labor challenges to OSHA's lockout/tagout standard, our attorneys fully set forth OSHA's basis for concluding that Congress gave the agency a more general mandate for safety rulemaking than for health rulemaking.
UAW v. OSHA, 938 F.2d 1310 (D.C. Cir. 1991).
We also successfully defended, against five of six separate industry challenges, OSHA's PEL for ambient lead in those industries.
Finally and most importantly, we obtained an extremely significant Supreme Court decision.
In perhaps the fiscal year's most significant decision for the Labor Department, the Court in Martin v. OSHRC, 111 S. Ct. 1171 (1991), unanimously held that the Secretary's reasonable interpretation of an Occupational Safety and Health Act standard is entitled to deference, notwithstanding the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission's contrary, reasonable interpretation.
This decision will greatly assist the Department's enforcement efforts under the OSH Act.
With respect to regional trial litigation, one of the most significant cases which we briefed and argued before the Review Commission was Boise-Cascade, 14 BNA OSHC 1993 (Nos. 89- 3087, 89-3088, 1991), in which the Review Commission affirmed the Secretary's policy regarding employee involvement in settlements, by continuing to hold that an employee party must be given an opportunity to provide settlement input prior to the execution of an agreement, and adding that the method or degree of such input would be left to the Secretary's discretion.
SOL attorneys also conducted oral argument before the Commission in Caterpillar, (OSHRC Docket No. 87-922) an egregious recordkeeping case, in which we argued that the company was properly cited on a violation-by-violation basis of the recordkeeping rules.
National and regional attorneys referred a record number of cases to the Department of Justice for criminal prosecution, including United States v. S.A. Healy Co., (E.D. Wisc., No. 90-Cr-123), which resulted in convictions on 3 counts of OSHA willful violations causing death, and the imposition of a $750,000 penalty.
This prosecution was handled in large part by three Chicago Regional attorneys, two of whom were deputized as Special Assistant U.S. Attorneys.
Our attorneys provided extensive assistance to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) in the administration and enforcement of OSHA's penalty enhancement program, implemented through the issuance of citations on a violation-by-violation basis.
We participated actively in the precitation review process and the formal settlement process, and have been successful in obtaining provisions for corporate-wide abatement in cases involving multi-plant employers.
During FY 91, our attorneys worked closely with Region III in litigating the largest outstanding ergonomics case (Pepperidge Farms I, OSHRC Docket No. 89-0265, ($1.385 million).
We also negotiated a farreaching corporate-wide ergonomics settlement with General Motors Corporation (GM), OSHRC Docket Nos. 90-410, 90-919, covering almost every GM plant nationwide and protecting over 300,000 employees.
In the chemical process safety area, SOL has provided assistance to OSHA in the development of the Process Safety Management (PSM) standard, and worked closely with Region VI in the litigation and settlement of several high-profile PSM cases.
These have included the explosion cases of Phillips 66, OSHRC Docket No. 90-1549, ($4 million) and CITGO Petroleum Corporation, OSHA Insp.
No. 110416880, ($6 million), as well as ARCO Chemical, OSHA Insp.
No. 110318540, ($3.48 million).
The settlement agreements in these three cases all provide for corporate-wide abatement, and closely track the substantive provisions of the proposed PSM standard.
In the regulatory area, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) promulgated final rules on explosives for metal and nonmetal mines, petitions for modification of a standard, and pattern of violations.
MSHA also published comprehensive proposed rules applicable to both coal and metal/nonmetal mines for hazard communication, training for experienced miners and supervisors, approval of electric cables and cable splice kit, and approval of electric motor assemblies.
The Office of the Solicitor committed significant resources to the drafting of these final and proposed rules.
Our attorneys helped draft final rules on ventilation for underground coal mines and on proposed assessments of civil penalties as well as helped write a proposal on noise for both coal and metal/nonmetal mines.
In addition, our attorneys participated a series of public hearings as part of comprehensive rulemakings on air quality and hazard communication.
Privacy Act matters, and advised MSHA in its establishment of a belt entry advisory committee.
Our attorneys were heavily involved in litigation concerning charges that more than 500 coal mine operators altered or tampered with respirable dust samples.
This litigation involved approximately 5000 separate violations for tampering at more than 800 mines throughout the country.
By the end of the fiscal year, the Department's civil citations related solely to the tampered dust samples already led to the filing of 4500 new cases with the independent Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Commission or FMSHRC).
Apart from the tampered dust sample cases, approximately 3800 new civil cases were filed with the Commission contesting the issuance of citations or withdrawal orders or contesting the proposed civil penalty violations.
The Commission also received approximately 50 new discrimination cases filed under Section 105(c) of the Mine Act.
Although the regional offices handled the majority of these cases, national office attorneys retained responsibility for cases requiring close coordination with the MSHA national office as well as the 4500 cases concerning tampered dust samples.
In other areas, our attorneys continue to be responsible for applications for temporary reinstatement of miners alleging discriminatory discharge, cases in which mine operators obtained expedited hearings of MSHA withdrawal orders, and cases arising out of serious mine accidents.
We also handled all the litigation pertaining to petitions for modification of MSHA's standards as well as reviewed an increased number of cases concerning the assessment of civil penalties against individual officers and agents of mine operators.
This past year, SOL attorneys assisted the investigation teams for multiple-fatality and multiple-injury accidents at three different underground mines.
Our attorneys also worked closely with the Department of Justice in preparing and prosecuting cases that we earlier had determined involved criminal violations.
Our work with Justice resulted in criminal charges against more than 30 companies for submitting fraudulent dust samples.
In one case, Peabody Coal Company pleaded guilty and received a $500,000 criminal fine.
SOL allocated substantial resources to the appellate workload before the circuit courts of appeals and the Commission.
The courts of appeals issued decisions in several major cases during the fiscal year.
In the area of mine safety, the Court in Jim Walters Resources, Inc. v. FMSHRC, 920 F.2d 738 (11th Cir. 1990), held that the temporary reinstatement provision in the Act satisfied due process, and that substantial evidence supported the temporary reinstatement of the miners who were discharged for failing to provide urine samples in their company's drug testing program.
In Otis Elevator Co. v. Secretary of Labor, 921 F.2d 1285 (D.C.Cir. 1990), the Court held that an elevator company, whose employees conducted weekly inspections and periodic maintenance at a mine, is an "operator" subject to MSHA regulation.
In UMWA v. MSHA, (D.C.Cir. Nos. 89-1702 and 89- 1703), the Court affirmed two petitions for modification which allowed the use of belt air to ventilate the working faces of the mine.
The Fourth Circuit in Southern Ohio Coal Co. v. FMSHRC, et al., 940 F.2d 653 (4th Cir. 1991), held that since Congress had given priority to preventing dangers associated with loose coal, a travelway was an "active working" and was required to be maintained by the operator.
A number of court cases were litigated but not decided during the fiscal year.
In Utah Power & Light Co. v. Secretary of Labor, et al., (10th Cir. No. 90-9538), the issue is whether an operator can be found to have violated the mandatory safety standard pertaining to coal accumulations when it complied with its own mandatory coal cleanup plan.
Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Secretary of Labor, (10th Cir. No. 91-1829), addresses whether a district court erred in issuing a preliminary injunction preventing MSHA from enforcing walkaround inspection rights where the miners'walkaround representatives were allegedly union representatives seeking to advance union organization.
A number of Commission cases were litigated but not yet decided: a series of cases which involve challenges to MSHA's policy of assessing enhanced penalties on operators with excessive violation histories, and ASARCO Inc. (SE 88-92 RM), which involves the informer's privilege against disclosure of documents.
SOL attorneys provided legal counsel to the Wage and Hour Division of the Employment Standards Administration.
Our attorneys also provided legal support in the preparation of significant proposed and final regulations, including regulations to implement the new $10,000 maximum civil money penalty for child labor violations; to assess new civil money penalties for repeated and willful fair labor standards (FLS) violations; to implement the new Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) exemption for certain highly-skilled computer software workers; to relieve public employers from certain of the "salary basis" requirements for the FLSA executive, administrative and professional exemption; and to implement the Employee Polygraph Protection Act.
We estimate that our attorneys rendered approximately 1,605 legal opinions and concluded 80 regulatory projects in the labor standards area.
With regard to litigation, SOL attorneys concluded approximately 2,500 matters that were referred by the Wage and Hour Division of the Employment Standards Administration during fiscal year 1991.
Significant appellate litigation under the FLSA included Martin v. Cooper Electric Supply Co., 940 F.2d 896 (1991), in which the Third Circuit upheld the Secretary's position that defendant's inside sales force was engaged in the production operation of the business, and therefore the administrative exemption should be denied.
The Secretary participated as an amicus in several FLSA cases decided by the appeals courts.
Department of Corrections, 942 F.2d 1562 (1991), the Eleventh Circuit ruled that defendant had failed to meet its burden of demonstrating that plaintiff, a probation officer, was an exempt "professional" employee.
In Pacific Merchant Shipping Association v. Aubry, 918 F.2d 1409 (1990), the Ninth Circuit held that neither the FLSA nor federal admiralty law operated to prevent a State from extending its overtime coverage to seamen and other maritime workers employed on off-shore vessels.
Significant cases arising under the employee protection ("whistleblower") statutes included an important decision by the Fifth Circuit in a whistleblower case arising under the Energy Reorganization Act.
In Macktal v. Secretary of Labor, 923 F.2d 1150 (5th Cir. 1991), the court affirmed both the Secretary's authority to review settlement agreements and her disapproval of a "gag order" provision contained in such an agreement.
Contrary to our argument, however, the court held that the Secretary could not sever the invalid provision and still approve the remainder of the agreement.
Another significant case arising under the same statute was Adams v. Dole, 927 F.2d 771 (1991), in which the Fourth Circuit affirmed the Secretary's determination that the employee protection provisions of the Energy Reorganization Act do not apply to individuals working at nuclear power facilities owned by the Department of Energy.
Significant decisions in the government contracts area included Building and Construction Trades Department, AFL-CIO v. United States Department of Labor, Wage Appeals Board, 932 F.2d 985 (1991), wherein the D.C. Circuit held that the Department's longstanding regulation was contrary to the Davis-Bacon Act to the extent that it applied the Act to materialdelivery truck drivers beyond "the geographical confines of the federal project's jobsite."
In Eddleman v. United States Department of Labor, 923 F.2d 782 (1991), the Tenth Circuit held that administrative proceedings under the McNamara O'Hara Service Contract Act are exempt from the automatic stay provision of the Bankruptcy Code.
In Building and Construction Trades Department v. Dole, No. 90-5345 (D.C. Cir.), the plaintiff sought to overturn the district court decision lifting a 1982 injunction of Davis-Bacón regulations which would permit a wider use of semi-skilled "helpers" on Federal construction projects at wage levels lower than those of skilled journeymen.
There was extensive district court litigation by the Regional Solicitors under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The San Francisco Region brought suit against several Saipan garment manufacturers in Martin v. American International Knitters Corp.
CA-91-0027 (U.S.D.C. No. Mar.I.), seeking payment of overtime compensation due, alleged "kickbacks," improper paycheck deductions and punitive and liquidated damages.
Settlement agreements were reached in several civil actions brought against the States of New York, New Jersey and West Virginia for the recovery of back wages and/or overtime compensation.
Ongoing litigation was pending against the States of New York, Wyoming, Alabama and Rhode Island.
A civil action brought by the Philadelphia Region against the Philadelphia Inquirer was settled, obtaining overtime compensation for so-called "stringers" whom the newspaper claimed were independent contractors or exempt professional employees.
Contract labor standards cases pending in the district court included Building and Construction Trades Department v. Martin, No. 91-2731 (D.D.C.), in which plaintiffs challenged a Wage Appeals Board ruling that collectively bargained wage deductions used to fund job targeting programs are not permissible under the Davis-Bacon Act.
In Service Employees International Union v. Martin, No. 91-0605 JAP (D.D.C.), plaintiffs challenged the amount of the health and welfare fringe benefit set by the Department under the Service Contract Act and the methodology.
A number of significant child labor cases were being prosecuted against restaurant chains and grocery stores.
There was also a substantial increase in defending civil money penalty assessments for child labor violations.
The Regional Solicitors experienced an increase in enforcement litigation on farm labor programs.
An injunction was obtained by Philadelphia SOL under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA), ordering a large agricultural employer to replace the substandard housing which the company provided for its migrant worker employees.
San Francisco SOL was assisting the Department of Justice in the criminal prosecution of a peonage case involving migrant agricultural workers, where the employer violated the MSPA wage, recordkeeping, and housing provisions.
During Fiscal Year 1991, SOL provided legal advice and litigation support services to the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) in connection with its administration of the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act (LHWCA), the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA), and Black Lung Benefits Act (BLBA).
We estimate that SOL attorneys participated in 1,365 litigation matters regarding the LHWCA program during fiscal year 1991.
With regard to appellate litigation, the courts of appeals upheld the position of OWCP concerning coverage in several cases.
Thus, the Fourth Circuit held that an aircraft fish spotter, injured while flying over navigable water, was a covered employee entitled to benefits under the Act.
Zapata Haynie Corporation v. Barnard, 933 F.2d 256 (4th Cir. 1991).
In Shea, S & M Ball Co., 929 F.2d 736 (D.C. Cir. 1991), the court held that a widow whose husband was injured prior to the repeal of the District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Act of 1928, but who died after the date of repeal, was still entitled to have her claim adjudicated under the 1928 enactment.
The courts also sustained OWCP's position with regard to an employer's entitlement to relief under section 8(f) of the Act.
In Container Stevedoring Company v. Director, OWCP (Gross), 935 F.2d 1544 (9th Cir. 1991), the court upheld the argument that the employer's failure to apply for section 8(f) relief as soon as the permanency of claimant's condition became an issue constituted an absolute defense against assessing liability against the special fund under section 8(f)(3) as added in 1984.
In Director, OWCP v. Berkstresser, 921 F.2d 306 (D.C. Cir. 1990), the court, reversing a decision awarding the employer relief under section 8(f), held that X-rays and attendant medical evaluations indicating minimal degree of degeneration were insufficient to establish a "manifest" preexisting permanent partial disability.
The Fourth Circuit, however, held that the manifest prerequisite to special fund relief does not apply to post-retirement occupational disease cases.
Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Co. v. Harris, 934 F.2d 548 (4th Cir. 1991).
And, finally, the First Circuit, in CNA Ins.
Co. v. Legrow, 935 F.2d 430 (1st Cir. 1991), held that the fact that a worker previously sustained back injuries does not, standing alone, establish that the worker had a preexisting permanent partial disability.
SOL was successful in obtaining judgment compelling an employer subject to the 1928 D.C. Act to pay its 1989 assessment plus interest.
This decision not only sustained the method used by OWCP in determining the assessment due, but also resulted in the employer paying the special fund $247,969.76.
We estimate that nearly 3,000 FECA litigation matters were referred to the Office of the Solicitor during Fiscal Year 1991.
Our attorneys monitored the progress of FECA subrogation matters to ensure that the government's interests in recouping moneys is protected.
During the fiscal year we recovered more than $5 million for the Employees'Compensation Fund as a result of damages received by injured federal employees from third-parties who cause the injury.
Litigation conducted by our regional attorneys resulted in the Department recovering funds in satisfaction of its FECA subrogation lien when the court ruled that, since a third-party recovery is held in trust to satisfy the government's right of reimbursement under FECA, the amount recovered does not become part of the debtor's estate for bankruptcy purposes.
In re Raymond L. Dixon, 132 B.R. 16 (S.D. Ohio, 1991).
Our attorneys continued to provide representation for the Director, OWCP, in appeals filed with the Employees' Compensation Appeals Board (ECAB).
Among the more important decisions issued by the Board was the case of John A. Butcher, ECAB Docket No. 90-1488 (September 30, 1991), wherein a majority of the panel affirmed an Office decision holding that the claimant waived his right to a hearing when he failed to show up or otherwise establish good cause for such failure.
The Board also affirmed a denial of benefits where the claimant alleged an emotional reaction to the employing agency's investigation into alleged improper conduct by the employee and subsequent disciplinary actions taken against the employee.
Richard J. Dube, ECAB Docket 91-672 (September 26, 1991).
In its decision the Board concluded that the employee's reaction to administrative actions taken by the agency did not constitute an injury sustained in performance of duty as required by the FECA.
We estimate that more than 7,000 litigation matters regarding the Black Lung Program were referred to the Office of the Solicitor during the fiscal year.
During the year, the Supreme Court, courts of appeals and Benefits Review Board issued a number of decisions of great significance to the black lung program.
In the latest of a series of Supreme Court cases involving the black lung program, the Court in Pauley v. Bethenergy Mines, Inc., 111 S. Ct. 2524 (1991), upheld the validity of the rebuttal provisions in the Department's interim presumption regulation.
Resolving a conflict in the circuits, the Court held that the presumption complied with the requirement in the Black Lung Benefits Act that we apply eligibility criteria "not more restrictive" than applied by the Department of Health Education and Welfare when it had administered the program.
The courts of appeals continued to construe the permanent disability criteria at 20 C.F.R. Part 718.
In Davis v. Director, OWCP, 936 F.2d 1111 (10th Cir. 1991), the Court agreed with the Department that claimant's industrial bronchitis, which disables him only when he is exposed to coal dust, constitutes a totally disabling respiratory impairment under the regulations since it prevents claimant from performing his usual coal mine work.
The Court also agreed with the Department that the coal mine operator may nevertheless be able to defeat the claim by proving that the miner has the respiratory capacity to perform comparable and gainful work.
In addition, the Seventh Circuit further explored the requirement that the miner's disability must be "due to" pneumoconiosis.
In Compton v. Director, OWCP, 933 F.2d 477 (7th Cir. 1991), for example, the Court refined its view that pneumoconiosis must be a "necessary" part of a miner's total respiratory disability.
In rejecting an argument that pneumoconiosis must comprise at least 51 percent of the overall disability, the Court recognized a more flexible standard for judging the legal sufficiency of medical evidence; accordingly, a physician must merely indicate that pneumoconiosis contributed to the overall disability.
The Seventh Circuit upheld the Department's view that an administrative law judge has the power to correct his or her mistakes of fact.
In Eifler v. Peabody Coal Company, 926 F.2d 663 (7th Cir. 1991), the Court agreed that Section 22 of the Longshore Act, as incorporated by the Black Lung Benefits Act, permits judges to correct their factual errors within statutory time limits, although the beneficiary of the modification proceeding has not specifically alleged those errors.
In Doris Coal Co. v. Stiltner, 938 F.2d 492 (4th Cir. 1991), the Fourth Circuit, in a case of first impression in the courts of appeals, explored the burden of proof imposed upon claimants who submit medical bills to be paid by the coal mine operator for the treatment of pneumoconiosis.
In these cases, the claimant's general entitlement to benefits under the Act has been established in a prior proceeding and the claimant is seeking payment of specific medical expenses.
The Fourth Circuit essentially adopted the Department's position that the coal mine operator must pay for treatment of any respiratory conditions and rejected the argument, advanced by Doris Coal, that the claimant must specifically prove that his respiratory condition is related to coal mine employment.
The Court agreed with the Department that the operator had already conceded that the claimant had a compensable respiratory disability and should not be permitted to ignore that concession in the medical benefits proceeding.
On a coverage issue, the Fourth Circuit held that a railroad worker who works in and around a coal mine in work that is integral to the extraction of coal is a "miner," and his employer is an "operator" liable for black lung benefits.
Norfolk & Western Railway v. Roberson, 918 F.2d 1144 (4th Cir. 1990).
In Helen Mining Co. v. Director, OWCP, 924 F.2d 1269 (3d Cir. 1991), the Third Circuit, sitting en banc, upheld the Department's view that the 1981 Amendments to the Act do not allow coal mine operators to shift liability for the payment of benefits to the Department-administered Black Lung Disability Trust Fund by asserting rights that belong exclusively to the miners or survivors who filed those claims.
The 1981 Amendments transferred liability for a narrowly drawn set of claims, including certain initially denied claims in which the claimant exercised a statutory right to elect further review.
In this case, the claimant's former employer had sought to exercise that right on his behalf.
The Court agreed with the Department that Congress provided the right to seek review only to claimants, and ruled that Helen Mining must bear liability for the claim.
The Department received a favorable decision from the Board in a case involving a black lung claimant to whom the Department had paid benefits pursuant to an initial determination of entitlement which was later reversed in litigation, thereby creating an overpayment.
In Weiss v. Director, OWCP, _ Black Lung Rep. (MB) , BRB No. 88-2827 BLA (Ben. Rev. Bd. Nov. 28, 1990), the' Board rejected the claimant's contention that recovery of the overpayment should be waived because the Department's initial award constituted erroneous agency information.
The Board also accepted the Department's position in two cases presenting important procedural issues.
In Bowman v. Clinchfield Coal Co., Black Lung Rep. (MB) , BRB No. 88- 3238 BLA (Ben. Rev. Bd. Sept. 6, 1991), the Board held that a party does not have the unqualified right to subpoena another party's witness; rather, the administrative law judge must determine whether the proponent has offered an adequate justification for requesting the subpoena.
In Allen v. Island Creek Coal Co., Black Lung Rep. (MB), BRB No. 89-1856 BLA (Ben. Rev. Bd. Sept. 24, 1991), the Board held that a coal mine operator does not have an unqualified right to have its physician examine a miner when the operator disputes the propriety of the miner's medical treatment and its liability for the resulting charges.
During fiscal year 1991, SOL attorneys participated in litigation, training activities, regulatory work, and the development of legal opinions involving issues arising under Executive Order 11246, as amended; sections 503 and 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended; the affirmative action provisions of the Vietnam Era Veterans' Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, as amended, 38 U.S.C. 2012 (VEVRA); Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; the nondiscrimination provisions of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) and its predecessor, the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA); and equal opportunity in apprenticeship programs under 29 C.F.R. Part 30.
Enforcement activity on behalf of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) constituted the major part of litigation for the civil rights program during the fiscal year.
Nationwide, 25 OFCCP enforcement cases were filed.
Twelve of these were brought under Executive Order 11246, 12 under section 503, and one under the Executive Order and VEVRA.
Fifteen OFCCP cases were resolved by Consent Decree during the fiscal year, and Recommended Decisions were issued in eleven.
In OFCCP v. Lawrence Aviation Industries, No. 87-OFC-11 (New York Region), the ALJ held that Lawrence had engaged in a pattern and practice of sex discrimination by failing to hire women for entry-level blue collar positions.
The Office of the Solicitor devoted significant resources to two Executive Order pattern and practice cases: OFCCP v. Jacksonville Shipyards, Inc. (JSI), No. 89-OFC-1, and OFCCP v. U.S.Air, No. 88-OFC-17.
Our attorneys conducted a three week trial in JSI and at the conclusion of the fiscal year was awaiting a recommended decision.
In U.S. Air, we conducted extensive discovery in preparation for a multi-week trial scheduled to begin early in fiscal year 1992.
We received an unfavorable decision in Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority v. DeArment, No. 90-3006 (D.D.C. 1991).
The court declared OFCCP's regulation prescribing the scope of Section 503's coverage of a contractor's work force invalid.
The decision will significantly limit the scope of coverage under section 503.
During the fiscal year, our attorneys also filed exceptions and responses to exceptions to ALJ Recommended Decisions in eight OFCCP cases.
We continued to prevail against court challenges to OFCCP's activities.
In Stouffer Foods Corporation v. Secretary of Labor, No. 7:89-2149 (D.S.C. 1990), appeal dism'd, No. 91-2327 (4th Cir. 1991), the company brought a broad based constitutional challenge to the Executive Order.
The Atlanta Regional Solicitor's Office filed an administrative complaint against Stouffer (No. 89-OFC-33) alleging a pattern and practice of race discrimination and several individual violations of section 503.
Stouffer alleged that the Executive Order is unconstitutional and that both the Order and section 503 violate the Contract Disputes Act.
Following a motion to dismiss and cross motions for summary judgement, the district court stayed its proceedings pending a final decision in the administrative enforcement case.
The court of appeals dismissed the company's appeal for lack of jurisdiction.
During the fiscal year, the Office of the Solicitor also continued its very active rulemaking, opinion and advice support of Departmental activities in the civil rights area.
The bulk of the assistance was provided to OFCCP, but other organizations throughout the Department such as Directorate of Civil Rights, the United States Employment Service (USES) and the Office of Job Corps (JC) also were given significant service.
The upcoming implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) generated substantial work.
Our attorneys helped develop a joint EEOC-OFCCP proposed coordination rule designed to carry out the ADA mandate that complaints of discrimination that fall within the overlapping jurisdiction of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act be handled in a manner that avoids duplication of effort and prevents the imposition of inconsistent or conflicting standards.
In addition, based on the Department's experience under Section 503, we provided extensive input to the EEOC in its preparation of substantive nondiscrimination regulations under the ADA.
We also assisted OFCCP in a comprehensive revision of the agency's Section 503 regulations, intended to conform the nondiscrimination provisions of those regulations to the EEOC's ADA regulations and to update and improve the regulations.
In furtherance of the Secretary's initiative regarding women in nontraditional jobs, SOL assisted in the preparation of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and Secretary's Order that provided for OFCCP to share with the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) responsibility for equal opportunity in apprenticeship programs.
Our attorneys assisted OFCCP and BAT in the development of a joint training program implementing the MOU, and then made presentations on enforcement of equal opportunity in apprenticeship at the training sessions.
Another area of continuing activity was OFCCP's glass ceiling initiative.
Glass ceiling is a short-hand reference to the phenomenon of organizational barriers to minorities and women that limit their access to, and opportunities in, corporate management positions.
SOL assisted OFCCP in the preparation of briefing materials on glass ceiling for the Department's Policy Review Board and reviewed for OFCCP a comprehensive compliance manual chapter on glass ceiling.
Passage of new dislocated worker legislation, as well as work on the Secretary's workforce quality, workplace-based learning, and worker readiness projects provided substantial challenges to our attorneys during FY 1991.
Our attorneys also continued to provide a wide range of advice and assistance to the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) in matters arising under the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
This included assistance in developing draft regulations and solicitations for grant applications for dislocated worker programs added to JTPA under the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments and the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1991.
With regard to litigation, we estimate that SOL attorneys concluded 520 matters referred by the Employment and Training Administration during the fiscal year.
In JTPA litigation, the Ninth Circuit upheld the Secretary's decision that the JTPA required both approval and submission of a job training plan by all parties.
The Court agreed with the Department's view that approval and submission are two separate steps of the plan approval process and that failure to obtain a consortium member's agreement to the submission of the plan was a proper basis for the Governor to disapprove it.
Alameda County Training and Employment Board v. U.S. Department of Labor, 930 F.2d 1440 (9th Cir. 1991).
SOL also provided assistance to the United States Employment Šervice (USES) in its administration of the Wagner-Peyser Act.
In the unemployment insurance area, we worked closely with ETA in developing proposed regulations governing the confidentiality of various kinds of information and data collected by State unemployment compensation agencies.
These regulations sought to harmonize a wide variety of statutory provisions governing the collection and disclosure of data by such agencies.
Öur attorneys also assisted ETA and the Treasury Department in drafting regulations to implement the Cash Management Improvement Act, which, among other things, should improve the management of the Unemployment Trust Fund.
Under the Trade Act, the D.C. Circuit rendered a significant decision in UAW v. Dole, upholding the Department's regulations governing the conditions under which the repayment of non-fraud overpayments of Trade Readjustment Allowance benefits may be waived by the States which administer the program.
It is estimated that 950 legal opinions and four regulatory projects were completed for the Employment and Training Administration during Fiscal Year 1991.
In fiscal year 1991, our attorneys filed numerous suits under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA), defended the Secretary's determination not to sue under the LMRDA, and assisted with negotiated settlements for remedial elections of union officers.
We participated in litigation and provided advice on issues arising under the Civil Service Reform Act, the Vietnam Era Veterans'Readjustment Assistance Act, the Urban Mass Transportation Act (UMTA), the Airline Deregulation Act (ADA), and the Redwood National Park Expansion Act.
In a significant Supreme Court decision concerning the LMRDA, International Organization of Masters, Mates & Pilots v. Brown, 111 S. Ct. 880 (1991), the Court adopted our view that the right of a candidate for union office to make reasonable requests for distribution of campaign literature under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act is not subject to "reasonable" union rules that purport to restrict the times at which such requests will be honored.
In other action before the Supreme Court, our petition for certiorari was granted in King v. St. Vincent's Hospital to decide whether, as we argue, a National Guard member who requests a three-year leave is entitled to reemployment rights under the Veterans Reemployment Rights Act.
112 S. Ct. 570 (1991).
Of the numerous other litigation matters pertaining to the LMRDA, perhaps the most significant was a case involving the United Automobile Workers Union (UAW), in which the district court enforced a series of administrative subpoenas that the Secretary had issued requesting the records of the UAW's "Flower Funds."
The court also denied the plaintiffs' request for a stay of the order enforcing the subpoenas pending appeal.
The court specifically rejected the plaintiffs'contention that releasing the subpoenaed documents would chill the First Amendment rights of UAW members who had contributed to the funds.
The Friends Social Club v. Secretary of Labor, No. 89-CV-72559-DT (E.D. Mich. May 13, 1991).
Also, in two defensive actions under the LMRDA, the Department successfully established that it had not acted arbitrarily or capriciously in refusing to bring suit.
Bradley v. American Postal Workers Union, No. 89-1194-CV-W-5 (W.D. Mo. May 7, 1991), appeal dismissed as to Secretary of Labor, No. 91-2260WKMC (8th Cir. Sept. 4, 1991); Peterson v. Dole, No. 90-2050 (D.D.C. Dec. 21, 1990), appeal filed, No. 91- 5021 (D.C.Cir. Jan. 18, 1991).
Our attorneys received a favorable decision in a case in which we participated as amicus at the invitation of the court.
In Crocker v. Piedmont Aviation, Inc., 933 F.2d 1024 (D.C.Cir. 1991), the Court deferred to our view that displaced airline employees who subsequently obtain jobs with non-covered airlines retain their first-hire right with covered airlines under the Airline Deregulation Act.
During the call-up of the Reserve Components for Operations Desert Shield/Desert Storm and later, after these service members returned to civilian life, our attorneys, both independently and in coordination with the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veteran's Employment and Training and Department of Defense components, fielded numerous inquiries and devoted substantial time to issues related to the reemployment rights of these reservists raised by the public and from within the Administration.
SOL continued to devote a substantial amount of time to advising the Department officials responsible for certifying that fair and equitable employee protections are in place under section 13(c) of the UMTA before financial assistance to transit authorities is distributed by the Department of Transportation.
The issues in this program area have become increasingly complicated and, in order for the Department to issue certifications of employee protective arrangements, at times have demanded in-depth research and analyses of Federal and State laws.
We participated in advising the Secretary's Office with regard to the continuation of the rehire program under the ADA.
It is estimated that SOL attorneys concluded 352 litigation matters, rendered 721 legal opinions, and completed 2 regulatory projects in this area during the fiscal year.
SOL attorneys represented the Department in a wide range of internal labor and employee relations cases including all unfair labor practice complaints, clarification of unit petitions and representation petitions filed before the Federal Labor Relations Authority.
Our attorneys assisted in representing the Department in U.S. courts of appeals and Federal district courts in cases involving internal labor and employee relations issues.
We handled some regional and all National Office appeals and complaints before the Merit Systems Protection Board and Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and represented the Department before arbitrators in cases brought under the collective bargaining agreement between the Department and AFGE Local 12, the union which represents the Department's employees in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area.
Our attorneys continued to advise Department management on labor and employee relations issues.
In addition, our attorneys reviewed for legal sufficiency all collective bargaining agreements between the Department and unions representing Department employees.
We also reviewed for legal sufficiency all proposed and final decisions issued by the Department on equal employment opportunity complaints by DOL employees.
It is estimated that SOL attorneys concluded 105 litigation matters and rendered 224 legal opinions regarding departmental labor relations during the fiscal year.
In the international area, our attorneys continued to provide legal counsel to the Bureau of International Labor Affairs with regard to international trade and investment issues arising from the Secretary's membership on various interagency committees charged with trade negotiations and trade policy functions.
In this regard, our attorneys continued to provide counsel concerning U.S. trade laws generally, as well as concerning ongoing trade negotiations such as the Uruguay Round negotiations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Our attorneys also had a major role in carrying out the Department's responsibilities in the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) negotiations.
Attorneys provided advice and assistance with respect to substantive issues arising from the negotiations and participated actively in two NAFTA negotiating committees, involving import safeguards and dispute settlement.
Our attorneys also assisted in the preparation of the Department's Memorandum of Understanding with Mexico's Secretariat of Labor, which provides for cooperative undertakings covering worker health, safety, and other issues.
We continued to provide advice relating to matters arising under the United States-Canada Free Trade Agreement and the Department's program of technical assistance to countries in Eastern Europe for the development of free markets and related institutions.
Conventions (multi-national treaties) of the International Labor Organization (ILO) that have been ratified by the United States.
This year's reports included the initial report on Convention No. 147 (Merchant Shipping- Minimum Standards), which was ratified in June 1988.
We also prepared the responses of the United States to cases filed with the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association.
The Solicitor of Labor continued to chair the Tripartite Advisory Panel on International Labor Standards (TAPILS), and our attorneys provided legal research and drafting services to the panel in its study of the extent to which United States law and practice is consistent with the requirements of various ILO conventions under review.
Capping four years of intensive consideration by TAPILS, SOL also assisted with efforts that resulted in United States ratification of ILO Convention No. 105 (Forced Labor), a major ILO Convention, in May 1991.
3. Convention On The Elimination Of All Forms Of Racial Discrimination.
Based on this review, our attorneys prepared a legal analysis regarding whether U.S. ratification would entail the obligation to change domestic labor law and practice, which was transmitted to the Legal Advisor of the Department of State by the Solicitor.
Attorneys from several SOL divisions worked on different legal aspects of the Department's immigration responsibilities, because such responsibilities are dispersed in several agencies of the Department.
SOL actively participated in drafting advance proposed, proposed, and interim final rules for these programs and was involved in initial work on the development of a methodology for a pilot program for admission of immigrant workers on the basis of labor market information.
Provision of advice and legal assistance to the Department with respect to the temporary alien agricultural labor certification ("H-2A") program under the Immigration and Nationality Act continued to provide an important focus.
We worked closely with the USES in developing proposed rules regarding recruitment of U.S. workers through 50-percent of the aliens' work contract period, and regarding determinations of prevailing practice for various working conditions.
In immigration related litigation, we received a favorable decision from the D.C. Circuit in American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations v. Dole, 932 F.2d 182 (D.C. Cir. 1991), which finally resolved the most critical issue in the administration of the H-2A program, a challenge by farmworker advocates to the new methodology for setting the Adverse Effect Wage Rate (AEWR), the minimum wage that must be offered by employers seeking to employ temporary foreign agricultural workers in the H-2A program.
After review of the exhaustive statement of reasons that the Department advanced to support its methodology, the Court fully accepted our rationale.
The Court concluded that the Secretary had fully explained her reasons for adopting the new methodology and that, given the Department's broad discretion in this area, the court would defer to the policy choices the Secretary made.
The primary litigation at the administrative level concerned the rejection of H-2A job orders filed by various sugar cane growers.
In Florida Fruit and Vegetable Association v. U.S. Department of Labor, Case No. 91-TLC-0004, we received a generally favorable decision from an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) in an expedited appeal.
The ALJ first found that the growers' deletion of language in a job order regarding the productivity of a worker was improper as it was a productivity standard which must remain in the order.
Significantly, the ALJ disagreed with the growers that their use of the task rate system was authorized by ET Handbook No. 385, ETA's internal operating handbook for the H-2A program, and ruled that the handbook provision recognizing task rates was contrary to the explicit regulations of the H-2A program, and that it was invalid as it had not been published for notice and comment.
During fiscal year 1991, SOL attorneys worked closely with officials of the Department in drafting proposed bills and related background materials, presenting the Department's views on pending legislation, and giving technical assistance to Congressional committees.
Our attorneys worked on the preparation and review of 78 statements for presentation by officials of the Department before committees of Congress (an increase of almost 20 percent from FY 1990).
Officials testified on legislative and oversight issues, such as tampering with coal mine dust sampling, striker replacement, job training, retirement income policy, immigration, construction safety and health, unemployment compensation, ratifying an international labor convention on forced labor, workplace substance abuse, affirmative action in foreign-owned firms, the North American Free-Trade Agreement, and workfamily issues.
In addition, 97 reports to the Office of Management and Budget and Congressional committees were prepared on a broad spectrum of legislative proposals of interest to the Department.
Our attorneys also participated in the development of major pieces of legislation during FY 1991.
On March 5, 1991, the Department transmitted to Congress a bill drafted by our attorneys, entitled the "Uniformed Services Employment Rights Act of 1991."
The bill expands and recodifies the protections that assure that reservists, members of the National Guard and other members of the uniformed services could return to civilian preservice employment following military duty.
On May 22, 1991, the Department transmitted to the Congress a bill drafted by our attorneys, entitled the "Job Training Partnership Act Amendments of 1991."
The bill would comprehensively revise JTPA to improve the targeting of programs to those facing serious barriers to employment, enhance the quality of services provided, promote coordination of human resource programs serving the disadvantaged, and strengthen fiscal and program accountability.
SOL attorneys provided technical assistance to Congressional committees in relation to legislation regarding job training (including the JTPA amendments), work-family issues, adjustment assistance to dislocated workers (including Clean Air Employment Adjustment Assistance), the unemployment compensation program, and equal employment opportunity for women and minorities.
SOL attorneys performed a wide variety of "house counsel" functions and provided administrative legal services.
The "house counsel" functions performed by our attorneys incuded furnishing advice with respect to the Ethics in Government Act as well as other conflict-of-interest laws, orders and regulations.
We were called upon to provide legal counsel on a broad range of laws applicable to Federal funds and personnel matters, and to provide legal counsel on a variety of special projects.
Our attorneys also provided legal support to the Office of Information and Public Affairs, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Women's Bureau, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management, and the Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs.
In the ethics area, the Solicitor's Office devoted substantial resources to implement provisions of the Ethics Reform Act of 1989.
We provided extensive advice on provisions relating to the new limitations on outside earned income and honoraria, as well as changes with respect to post-employment conflicts-of-interest.
SOL attorneys provided regular training on a wide range of ethics issues from audiences ranging from the Secretary of Labor to the most junior new employees of the Department.
In addition, substantial time was devoted to one-on-one counseling of employees seeking ethics advice.
SOL attorneys continued to render general legal advice on questions relating to the Administrative Procedure Act, the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), the Privacy Act (PA), the Federal Advisory Committee Act, the Paperwork Reduction Act, the Federal Register Act, and several related laws.
The handling of administrative appeals under the FOIA and PA continues to be a major responsibility.
During fiscal year 1991, action was completed on over 230 appeals.
We also reviewed and/or issued determinations on over 1,200 subpoena requests served upon Department officials arising out of private litigation in which the Department is not a party.
In FY 1991, we provided considerable advice to the Department on the initial implementation of two new and important laws, the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act and the Negotiated Rulemaking Act.
Our attorneys also provided advice to the Justice Department concerning claims filed against the Department of Labor under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA), and processed approximately 4,000 FTCA claims and rendered litigation support services to the Justice Department.
Several favorable decisions were issued in FTCA suits including Nichols v. Barber-Greene Co. (D. Nev.), wherein the court held that neither the Mine Safety and Health Act nor its regulations imposed mandatory obligations on the Department for which liability could be assessed under the FTCA.
During the fiscal year, SOL attorneys provided legal counsel regarding matters arising under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), actively participated in several important regulatory, exemptive, and interpretive projects under ERISA, filed several significant enforcement actions pursuant to ERISA, received several favorable court rulings, and resolved a number of other cases by judicially entered consent decree.
Enforcement actions arising out of problems in the pension area, as exemplified by the failure of Executive Life Insurance Company, were of major importance.
In Martin v. Pacific Lumber Company, No. 91-1812 (N.D.Cal. filed on June 12, 1991), we filed suit against Pacific Lumber Company and others, alleging that the defendants imprudently selected Executive Life as the annuity provider despite negative findings by a recognized insurance expert as to the insurer's ability to pay claims.
Two other similar cases involving Executive Life, Martin v. Magnetek, et al, No. 91- C-613 (E.D. Wisc. filed on June 12, 1991), and Martin v. AFG Industries, et al, No.
CA-4-91-0489K (N.D. Texas filed on July 11, 1991), were filed in Wisconsin and Texas, respectively.
During the fiscal year, our attorneys provided legal counsel to the Secretary regarding matters arising from her chairing of the Board of Directors of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation and to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration regarding enforcement of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) and the Federal Employees Retirement System Act.
SOL attorneys participated in several important regulatory, exemptive, and interpretive projects under ERISA, reproposing a regulation involving self-directed individual participant accounts under section 404(c), 56 Fed.Reg.
10724 (March 13, 1991), and issuing an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking relating to the establishment of minimum standards for annuity contracts, which if satisfied, would relieve a plan of future liability to the participant on whose behalf the annuity was purchased.
56 Fed.Reg.
28639 (June 21, 1991).
In addition, prohibited transaction exemptions involving foreign exchange transactions and bank services provided to IRA accounts were proposed.
56 Fed.
Reg.
11757 (March 28, 1991); 56 Fed.Reg.
8365 (February 28, 1991).
We also participated in the development of numerous interpretive opinions, many involving MEWAs, in coordination with our client agency, the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.
We have estimated that SOL attorneys rendered 294 legal opinions and completed 16 regulatory projects in the pension area during the fiscal year.
Employee Retirement Income Security Act.
In FMC Corp. v. Holliday, 111 S. Ct. 403 (1990), the Court held that ERISA preempts a State anti-subrogation statute insofar as it would preclude a self-insured employee welfare benefit plan from exercising subrogation rights on a plan participant's tort recovery from a third party.
And in Ingersoll-Rand Co. v. McClendon, 111 S. Ct. 478 (1990), the Court held that ERISA preempts a State common law claim that an employer has unlawfully discharged an employee in anticipation of the vesting of his retirement benefits.
We also received a favorable decision in a case in which our attorneys participated as amicus at the invitation of the court.
In Williams v. Wright, 927 F.2d 1540 (11th Cir. 1990), the Court held that a retirement package adopted and implemented for a single employee at his retirement can be an employee benefit plan as defined by ERISA.
Another area of significant interest involved multiple employer welfare arrangements (MEWAs), health and welfare plans generally regulated by State authorities unless certain exceptions apply.
We filed Martin v. Rowe, No. 91-10816H (D.Mass. filed March 14, 1991), an action against the principals of a MEWA, the OMNI, and its accounting firm, alleging that the OMNI principals breached their fiduciary duties by attempting to make the trust look like an ERISA covered plan in order to avoid State regulation, causing OMNI to pay excessive fees, and naming the accounting firm as knowing participants.
We filed suit against the trustees of the Local Union 867 welfare fund and four insurance agencies alleging prudence violations arising from marketing, administration, and claims payment of a union sponsored welfare arrangement marketed to employers without a collective bargaining relationship with the union in Martin v. Goldstein, No. 91 CIV 4031(LJF) (S.D.N.Y. filed June 13, 1991).
Several courts issued decisions addressing various aspects of plan administration.
In LTV Corp. v. Martin, No.
CA 90 CIV 6048(KTD), slip op. (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 3, 1991), on September 3, 1991, the court issued the latest decision in this case.
We had sought a preliminary injunction to ensure that one of LTV's plans continued to be funded in the face of competing claims by other LTV creditors in the bankruptcy proceedings.
The court held that our claims for minimum funding contributions were not entitled to priority status.
Consequently, the Department could not maintain an action to compel payment of pension plan obligations outside of a plan for reorganization approved by the bankruptcy court.
In a December 6, 1990 decision, Dole v. Compton, 753 F.Supp.
563 (E.D. Pa. 1990), the court held that liability may be imposed on nonfiduciaries who knowingly participate in a fiduciary breach.
The court in Martin v. Formica, No.
C-87-2995, slip op. (S.D. Ohio September 30, 1991), found that plan fiduciaries failed to carry their burden of proof that compensation paid by the trustees of pension and disability plans to the sponsoring union for administrative services, salaries, and expenses were reasonable and thus violated ERISA.
The court in Dole v. Feilen, et al, No. 88-103, slip op. (S.D. Iowa Nov. 3, 1990), a case involving the purchase of employer securities by an employee stock ownership plan (ESOP), opined that the named defendants breached their fiduciary duties to the ESOP by engaging in a series of self-dealing transactions which, we alleged, ultimately reduced that value of the stock to zero, thus destroying the value of the ESOP.
Questions of loss are pending on appeal.
In addition, several significant cases filed in previous years were resolved by judicially entered consent decree.
In Dole v. The Graniteville Corp., No 1-86-937-8, slip op. (D.S.C Dec. 30, 1990), we alleged that the fiduciaries of an employee stock ownership plan failed to enforce an irrevocable commitment by the company to pay the ESOP an amount equal to surplus funds to be recouped by the company upon termination of two pre-existing pension plans.
On December 3, 1990, the court entered a settlement agreement requiring the company to pay $7,628,000 in interest to the ESOP.
The company also paid a $236,000 civil penalty under ERISA section 502(l).
The court preliminarily approved a settlement agreement in Martin v. Tower Asset Management, Inc., et al., No. 87-1492 (S.D.N.Y. filed on March 5, 1987), which was later entered by the court.
The case involved the trustees'hiring of an unqualified investment manager to handle plan assets, and the subsequent losses incurred by the plans due to the trustees'negligence and the investment manager's prohibited transactions.
In Martin v. Race, No. 91-278-D, slip op. (D.N.H. June 28, 1991), we obtained a $22,918,000 settlement as a result of an investment manager's violation of plan documents.
We estimate that 234 pension matters were referred for litigation and that 98 such litigation matters were concluded during the fiscal year.
The Office of the Solicitor continues to face the continuing challenge of facing a steadily growing workload with a stable amount of resources.
In taking on this task, the Office will explore technological advances that can assist workload management, adopt better case screening techniques, study the availability of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, and train and otherwise work closely with client agencies to better prepare cases for litigation.
In Fiscal Year 1991, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy (OASP) continued its primary role to coordinate the policy review and decision-making process for the Department of Labor.
The major vehicle in support of this effort was the Policy Review Board (PRB).
Chaired by the Assistant Secretary for Policy, the PRB provided an open forum for review and discussion of important issues affecting the entire Department.
A significant activity in FY 1991 was production of the Secretary's Goals and Objectives Program for the Department to serve as a management tool to measure performance and to monitor progress throughout the year.
The goals and objectives, which dealt with such issues as training, safety in the workplace, pension policy, enforcement efforts, empowerment of the individual, and technical assistance to Eastern Europe, were broken down into a detailed, month-by-month map of steps towards achievement.
OASP was made responsible for coordinating both the implementation and the ongoing administration of the program.
In response to the Administrative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Act of 1990, the Department was developing a general policy which encouraged greater use of ADR techniques whenever the parties involved agreed to them and it was practical and desirable to do so.
ADR methods included mediation, minitrials, settlement judges, and other informal techniques aimed at reaching a consensual resolution of disputes.
In May 1991, the Department published a Federal Register notice requesting comments on how it should proceed to implement ADR.
DOL agencies were surveying their programs to identify likely areas for using ADR and any statutory or regulatory barriers to its use.
In addition, the Department was working closely with the Administrative Conference of the United States and the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to develop plans for a pilot test of ADR in at least one region during FY 1992.
Another major effort undertaken by OASP was the Secretary's Initiative to Improve Employment Opportunities for Women and Minorities in the Skilled Trades.
The Secretary directed the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT), Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFFCP), and the Women's Bureau to develop and implement an aggressive enforcement, outreach, and education program to increase the recruitment and retention of women and minorities in apprenticeship.
The Department stepped up enforcement of laws protecting equal employment opportunity in apprenticeship by granting enforcement authority to OFCCP in addition to BAT.