The quality of the nation's workforce and opportunity and safety on the job remained high on the Labor Department's (Department) agenda of priority concerns in Fiscal Year 1992.
Calling recognition and reward of individual merit two of the keys to a competitive economy, Secretary of Labor Lynn Martin issued a progress report on the Department's glass ceiling initiative to dismantle barriers that restrict the advancement of qualified women and minorities in their chosen careers.
She cited evidence of corporate awakening to the issues of opportunity and diversity in the workforce but said there was still a general absence of women in top-level jobs and in employee development programs that lead to the executive suite.
Steps taken during the year to spur progress in breaking down barriers to advancement included increased emphasis on small and medium sized businesses, efforts to enlist the aid of the academic community and the information media and creation of a Glass Ceiling Commission to study factors contributing to the small number of women and minorities in the corporate hierarchy.
The Job Training Partnership Act, the largest federally funded program to help young people and adults overcome barriers to employment, was significantly bolstered by enactment of Departmentsupported amendments to improve the delivery of services to youth and adults who are most in need of assistance.
The Department also supported a number of legislative proposals put forth during the year to strengthen and expand government job training and placement programs.
The core proposal, Job Training 2000, was designed to make federal training programs more accessible, more efficient, and more responsive to local and individual needs.
It would establish a network of one-stop shopping skill centers in communities across the nation to provide information on and access to an array of vocational education and training programs.
The system envisioned by Job Training 2000 would be augmented by proposed new training programs for workers at all age and skill levels.
Other programs were proposed for young people.
The Youth Training Corps would enable disadvantaged youth to acquire needed job skills while performing community service and environmental and conservation work in public sites such as parks, recreational facilities and low-income housing.
The National Youth Apprenticeship Program would help young people prepare for the workforce through a school-towork transition program available in every state and school system of the country.
Significant job safety activities during the year included a $10 million penalty — by far the largest in the 20-year history of the Occupational Safety and Health Act — against IMC Fertilizer Inc. and Alberta Natural Gas U. S. The settlement resulted from an explosion May 1, 1991 in Sterlington, LA, that killed eight workers, injured 42 others, and also injured some 70 members of the community.
The Department continued to pursue enforcement actions against mining firms charged with tampering with coal dust sampling devices used to protect miners against black lung disease.
The on-going investigation and prosecution of the cases resulted in 85 companies and individuals pleading guilty to criminal charges of coal dust sample tampering.
Final rules and standards dealing with significant job safety and health hazards were issued by both the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA).
OSHA issued six final standards, including occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens and process safety management of highly hazardous chemicals.
Among final regulations published by MSHA were rules on explosives and blasting and standards for underground coal mine ventilation.
OSHA completed reviews of seven cases involving alleged egregious violations of safety rules, including IMC Fertilizer, and proposed more than $86 million in federal penalties.
State job safety agencies proposed $42 million in state penalties in these cases.
MSHA assessed some $29 million in civil penalties for safety violations in the mining industry.
A fire that killed 25 workers at a North Carolina poultry processing plant prompted OSHA to conduct an extensive investigation and evaluation of the state's safety and health program.
Serious deficiencies were found.
When they weren't corrected within 90 days, OSHA began to withdraw approval of the North Carolina plan.
This process was suspended when the state promised to take corrective action, but OSHA continued to monitor the situation closely.
OSHA extended its response to the North Carolina fire by carrying out comprehensive evaluations of all federally approved state plans.
States were notified of any deficiencies and given deadlines for correcting them.
OSHA continued its practice of helping employers solve difficult safety and health problems, with particular emphasis on smaller employers in high-hazard industries.
MSHA joined with other interested federal agencies to form a task group to examine and recommend improvements in the coal dust sampling program.
The task group's findings and recommendations were the subject of discussions between MSHA officials and industry representatives at a series of meetings around the country.
Changes in the program are expected to be carried out in the next 12 to 18 months.
MSHA stepped up its efforts to improve safety practices in small mines because of their relatively high fatality rate.
As a result of this ongoing initiative, 38 mines in Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia now have accident prevention programs and another 18 mines are receiving help.
The drive to shut down illegal coal mines continued unabated during the year with MSHA obtaining convictions against ten individuals, three of whom received mandatory 5-year sentences.
A major goal of the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) was achieved when Congress passed and the President signed legislation targeting more Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) resources on workers most in need of help to succeed in a changing job market.
ETA quickly moved into high gear to develop regulations to assure that sponsors of JTPA-funded programs carry out the intent of the amendments.
2000, the National Youth Apprenticeship Act and other proposals to help young people and a new program for dislocated adult workers.
Some 300,000 workers who lost or were about to lose their jobs received help during the year under the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance program.
This program assists workers affected by mass layoffs or plant closings brought about by technological change, foreign competition, corporate restructuring, reductions in defense spending and other economic factors.
The Job Corps completed testing a new education program to improve academic instruction and intensified efforts to address the needs of students who have limited English speaking abilities.
ETA moved forward with its campaign to develop a system of voluntary, industry-based skill standards and certification that can be used to define successful job performance.
More than 130 people testified at public hearings held in five cities across the nation, and a Federal Register notice inviting written comments on skill standards and certification generated more than 150 responses.
ETA and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) continued to work together on three major demonstration projects.
One seeks to link child support enforcement with employment services for parents, mostly fathers, who don't have custody of their children.
Another joint initiative is testing ways to coordinate the Department's employment services and HHS's alcohol and drug treatment programs.
The third combines training programs and other available resources as an alternative to incarceration for alienated and criminally at-risk youth.
More than $136 million in back wages were obtained for some 382,000 workers through Employment Standards Administration (ESA) enforcement activities under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Investigations under the Davis Bacon and Service Contract Acts and related statutes resulted in $39.7 million in back wages being paid to some 44,600 workers employed by government contractors.
Significant wage and hour cases resolved during the year included a settlement calling for $9 million in back wages and punitive damages to be paid to more than 1,200 garment workers in Saipan.
In another case, a major grower of ornamental flowers pled guilty to federal charges including racketeering and harboring undocumented workers and agreed to pay $1.4 million in back wages to 380 workers illegally recruited in Mexico.
ESA continued its crackdown on child labor law violations, focusing its attentions on smaller cities.
More than $14.4 million in penalties were assessed as a result of almost 34,000 investigations that found more than 19,000 minors illegally employed.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) continues to play a major role in the Department's drive to remove barriers that restrict the advancement of women and minorities in mid- and upperlevel management positions.
A report, Pipelines for Progress, A Status Report on the Glass Ceiling Initiative, summarized advances made by women and minorities and what can and should be done to integrate them fully into the corporate hierarchy.
OFCCP's monitoring of federal contracts to assure equal employment opportunity led to 638 agreements in the fiscal year under which contractors committed to almost $31 million in outlays for pay adjustments, training, recruitment or similar purposes.
More than $11 million of this was for back pay for 2,700 women, minorities, disabled people and veterans.
OFCCP completed 5,000 compliance reviews and 1,150 complaint investigations during the year, obtained almost 3,800 conciliation agreements or letters of commitment from federal contractors to correct violations and recommended 53 enforcement actions that could result in firms losing their eligibility for federal contracts.
Two contractors were debarred.
Continuing its policy of stressing voluntary compliance, OFCCP provided more than 51,000 hours of technical assistance to some 15,000 contractors to help them understand and meet affirmative action requirements.
The Office of Workers' Compensation Programs launched a major review of the cases of federal employees who are receiving compensation to determine their disability status, reemployment potential and appropriate level of benefits.
Early results of the four-year project, which has the potential to save an estimated $12 million in benefits, were encouraging, with benefits adjusted or terminated in some 250 cases for a savings of $800,000 over the same four-month period in the previous year.
The Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) continued to press for greater retirement security for American workers through a legislative package that would expand coverage under employersponsored retirement plans, improve portability of pension benefits and simplify pension plan regulation.
The goal of improved portability was achieved during the year when Congress passed and the President signed legislation that encourages workers to preserve their retirement benefits when they change jobs.
PWBA also supported legislative proposals to improve and expand health insurance coverage.
Enforcement efforts resulted in the recovery of more than $227 million for employee benefit plans, assessment of more than $36 million in reporting violation penalties and 51 criminal violations referred for prosecution.
Considerable regulatory attention was focused on protecting the benefits of people whose pensions are provided in the form of annuity contracts, with emphasis on problems arising from the collapse of Executive Life Insurance Company of California.
By the end of the fiscal year, four lawsuits involving $82 million in pension assets had been filed against plan managers who had purchased group annuity contracts from companies that were unable to pay promised benefits.
PWBA's assistance was instrumental in obtaining some $4 million in benefits for pension and welfare plan participants who sought the agency's help after failing on their own to get payments to which they were entitled.
The availability of two of the nation's most closely watched economic indicators was accelerated as the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) began releasing the Consumer Price Index a day earlier in the month and moved up release of the monthly Producer Price Index by an average of two to three days.
In on-going efforts to strengthen employment data, BLS and the Census Bureau reached agreement on and began testing a new questionnaire and new computer-assisted interviewing techniques for the Census Bureau's monthly Current Population Survey.
The survey provides data used by BLS to determine the size of the labor force and the extent of unemployment across the nation.
Fraud and other integrity investigations by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) produced $58 million in fines, penalties and recoveries of government funds.
The 500 audit reports issued by the OIG under its responsibility to examine Labor Department operations for efficiency and economy questioned more than $86 million in costs.
Among the matters receiving particular attention during the year were the vulnerability of Job Training Partnership Act funds to misuse and fraud, the inadequacy and unreliability of pension plan audits, fraud in employersponsored health plans and under reliance on criminal enforcement of job safety violations.
Federal courts ordered the restitution of almost $12 million in embezzled union funds and imposed more than $121,000 in fines as a result of enforcement actions initiated by the Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS).
Investigations by OLMS led to 182 indictments and other criminal actions during the year and 177 convictions and pre-trial agreements.
To help understand and improve the economic status of women in their prime earning years, the Women's Bureau gathered and analyzed data such as the wages, benefits and types of jobs held by women aged 35-54.
Other issues receiving attention included women in nontraditional jobs, women in math and science, training, flexible employee benefits and conflicts between work and family responsibilities.
Substance abuse in the workplace was one of a number of issues high on the agenda of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy (OASP).
Key people from businesses and public agencies throughout the nation attended an OASP conference in Washington, D.C. to discuss ways to fight workplace drug abuse in small businesses.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans Employment and Training substantially expanded its program to help the increasing number of people moving from military to civilian life.
Called the Transition Assistance Program, this inter-agency effort (which includes the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs), advises men and women being discharged from the armed forces on job interview techniques, tells them about employment and training opportunities and makes available other information to help them succeed in the civilian economy.
By the end of the year, the program was operating at 178 sites in 44 states, making it available to 97 percent of personnel being discharged from the military in the continental United States.
The Office of the Solicitor was involved in a Supreme Court case that strengthened the right of military reservists to return to their civilian jobs after serving on active duty.
Supporting the Department's position, the Supreme Court ruled that the length of a leave of absence for active duty does not affect the reemployment rights of reservists under the Veterans Reemployment Rights Act.
The Department's International Labor Affairs Bureau (ILAB) took the lead in assuring that the interests of American workers received full consideration in the negotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Issues addressed in connection with the NAFTA negotiations included worker safety and health, child labor, labor law and worker rights.
ILAB was instrumental in negotiating a safeguard mechanism that will allow for a quick and effective response to any surge in imports from NAFTA partners.
ILAB continued to give technical assistance to Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Albania, Romania and the Czech and Slovak Republic to encourage the movement toward democracy and free markets.
ILAB staff worked with the governments of these nations to set up employment service offices, develop programs to help dislocated workers, teach worker skills and introduce entrepreneurial development.
The Bureau of Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative Programs published a report on how selected collective-bargaining agreements deal with work and family issues such as maternity and parental care leave, child and elder care, flexible benefit programs and alternative work schedules.
The Bureau also completed a training manual, Interest-Based Negotiation, that helps companies and unions engaged in collective bargaining find mutual interests that lead to durable solutions and improved labor-managment relations.
The Department's commitment to practice wht it preaches by improving working conditions for its own employees was recognized by the President's Council on Management Improvement, which made the Department's Model Workplace Program a recipient of its Management Excellence Award.
Additions to the Model Workplace Program included a Serving Our Customer initiative that brings together field employees and their supervisors to find ways to improve the quality of Department services to its employees and the public.
The Department's primary training resource, the DOL Academy, gave programs in sexual harassment awareness to all employees and developed and began training programs on workforce diversity issues for all supervisors and managers.
As the Department of Labor (Department) continued to expand its role in human resource development and workforce readiness, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) made significant progress on many fronts to improve and upgrade the skills, productivity and competitiveness of the American workforce.
Note: For activities that operate on a program year (PY) cycle, information covers PY 1991 [July 1, 1991, through June 30, 1992].
For those that operate on a fiscal year (FY) basis, information covers FY 1992 [October 1, 1991, through September 30, 1992].
Job Training Partnership Programs.
In FY 1992 The Office of Employment and Training Programs (OETP) worked with the federal job training system on the JTPA amendments.
OETP began developing the regulations to these amendments to help enhance program quality, increase targeting of those participants most in need of services and improve fiscal and program accountability.
In FY 1992 ETA continued its increased oversight and monitoring activities to better identify potential policy and program issues and improve management practices and the quality of services.
ETA is working with the states to improve oversight and correct weaknesses within the system.
In FY 92, the fifth Annual Job Training Partnership Act Presidential Awards were presented to 14 recipients to recognize their outstanding contributions to the nation's training and employment system.
Awards were presented to outstanding private sector volunteers, private industry councils and training programs.
Recipients were honored for their commitment to quality training and employment opportunities for the economically disadvantaged and others who face serious employment barriers.
Under Title II-A, JTPA gives block grants to each state for training and other employment-related services for adults and youth.
Twenty-two percent of a state's II-A funds are reserved for statewide activities, including coordination with education agencies and services for older workers.
The remainder is allocated to service delivery areas (SDA) within the state.
In PY 1991, about $1.8 billion was appropriated to serve some 1.1 million youths and adults.
Of those served, over 90 percent of SDA participants are economically disadvantaged.
Hence a greater emphasis is placed on services to those most in need.
The Summer Youth Employment and Training Program (JTPA Title II-B) provides job opportunities as well as training and educational services for the economically disadvantaged aged 14 to 21.
The program emphasizes remedial education in math and reading for those below grade level.
For the 1992 program, about $683 million was appropriated to serve some 516,000 participants.
In addition to the basic 1992 summer program, a special supplemental funding of $500 million was added as an emergency aid package in June 1992, following the riot in Los Angeles and the flood in Chicago.
Programs under Title III of the JTPA are funded by formula grants and discretionary awards to states and other entities to give dislocated workers training and readjustment services.
The states were allotted $422,709,400 in PY 1991.
Governors kept up to 40 percent of the EDWAA funds for rapid response activities; state, industry or regional projects and administrative costs.
At least 60 percent of each state's allotment was distributed to substate areas for retraining and basic readjustment services.
Seventy five discretionary EDWAA projects in 33 states were awarded $91,304,608 from the Secretary of Labor's reserve account.
Included were services for workers displaced by automobile manufacturing, food processing, coal mining and other manufacturing and service industries and for emergency grants to respond to dislocations from natural disasters.
Special demonstration projects were awarded $4,614,672 for activities related to dislocated farmers and job creation and $2,696,470 for technical assistance and training.
Eighteen projects were funded at $23,141,798 to help workers dislocated by reduced national defense expenditures.
In PY 1991, the Job Corps—authorized by JTPA Title IV—served about 60,500 new enrollees Average enrollment was 39,500.
Expenditures budgeted for the year were $867.5 million.
Pilot testing of a major initiative to develop a new Computer Managed Instruction Academic Education program in basic, graded and advanced reading, mathematics, writing and thinking skills, general educational development and world of work and exit readiness was completed in January, 1992.
Revisions were made based on results analysis, and implementation training for all centers will be conducted through late 1993.
Curricula for new English-as-a Second-Language and Alternative Learning programs have been developed for use in PY 1992.
They will address the needs of students who have limited Englishspeaking abilities or problems progressing in the regular academic program.
To help keep vocational training curricula current with workplace needs, Job Corps developed and tested two new trade offerings in computer technology during PY 1991.
Efforts continued to validate student attainment of vocational competencies, scheduled for national use in late 1993.
An entrepreneurship curriculum was developed for testing in PY 1992 and will be for students who have completed vocational training and wish to operate businesses.
A new Social Skills Training program began in PY 1991 to help students develop appropriate social behavior and skills (such as handling anger and aggression, being on time and cooperating with others), which will help them in Job Corps and on the job.
Native American Programs.
JTPA Title IV programs for native Americans are funded through grants to native American communities and related organizations.
In PY 1991 about $64 million was given to some 26,000 participants for classroom and on-the-job training, work experience, community-service employment and support.
Focus was on trainee placement in the private sector.
ETA officials made about 65 on-site visits to monitor performance, and grantee performance continued to improve.
Supplemental summer youth funding became available in late June for allocation.
Although there was limited time to allocate funds, 130 grantees were given rapid technical assistance.
This enabled them to submit their Summer Youth Program Title II-B grants and have modifications approved before June 30, 1992.
Title IV of JTPA also authorizes Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker programs.
In PY 1991 these programs served, at a cost of $77 million, more than 58,000 people.
Some 11,000 participants received classroom training, 9,600 were enrolled in on-the-job training and 1,700 were placed in work-experience positions.
ETA emphasized working with young farmworkers, with about 9,300 participants ages 14-21 in employment and training activities.
As in previous years, grantees were instructed to refer eligible youth to Job Corps centers.
This year, grantees could also make referrals to programs for high school equivalency degrees and college assistant migrant programs.
A continuing initiative in PY 1991 was in agricultural upgrades.
Grantees placed about 10 percent of their clients in agricultural- or related- jobs offering upgraded, unsubsidized full-time employment.
Under JPTA Title IV, ETA gave eight national organizations $3.9 million in PY 91 to administer training and employment services for disabled people.
They served more than 7,800 individuals with such conditions as mental retardation, epilepsy, blindness and other physical and emotional problems.
More than 96,000 low income elderly persons received part-time jobs through the $390 million authorized for the Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP) in PY 1991.
About 22 percent of the participants moved from subsidized to unsubsidized positions, many in the private sector and some at the community agencies, such as day care centers, nursing homes, fire departments and hospitals, where participants worked while enrolled in SCSEP.
In Texas, due to cuts in appropriations and the large influx of unemployed, the state job service could help only those on unemployment insurance; however, SCSEP projects allowed Texas to assist others in need of such services.
In many cases, sponsors have moved beyond simply enrolling individuals in community service projects.
To ensure that enrollees are receiving their social security benefits, several sponsors worked with the Social Security Administration to make enrollees aware of their entitlements.
Another sponsor offers elder hostel courses to enrollees for good performance under the SCSEP.
Technical and Educational Assistance to Mid- and Small-Sized Firms Technical and education assistance to mid- and small-sized firms (TEAMS) is a new Department initiative that will be carried out through broad-based federal partnerships to help companies with under 500 employees meet their needs for a skilled, flexible workforce.
TEAMS will work with federal, regional and state providers developed to address small business needs.
Youth Apprenticeship.
The National Youth Apprenticeship Act of 1992 was introduced in Congress in May, 1992 to broaden youth access to quality training programs through the establishment of a federal-statelocal framework.
It implements apprenticeship programs for high school juniors and seniors and ensures that such programs maintain high academic standards and promote the transition from school to work.
Skill Standards.
The Department of Labor has been a catalyst for action in the exploration of voluntary, industry-based skill standards and certification.
Skill standards define the needs for successful job performance and may be used to instruct decision-makers in all sectors of the economy.
In April public hearings on voluntary, industry-based skill standards and certification were held in Boston, Atlanta, Chicago, San Francisco and Washington, D.C. Some 130 people testified; most expressed overwhelming support for the initiative.
Written comments on the Federal Register Notice were accepted through May 1992.
More than 150 industry leaders, state and local government representatives, training providers, educators and officials from organized labor commented.
National Advisory Commission on Work-Based Learning.
This was established to advise the Secretary of Labor on ways to increase worker skills and expand and improve work-based learning.
The Commission consists of representatives from industry, labor, community organizations, government and education.
In PY 1991, the commission met three times.
Based on a series of national roundtables in the summer and site visits to best-practice companies, the commission developed a plan for the Department to promote work-based learning and presented it to the Secretary September 17, 1991.
In November 1990, the Department announced the Secretary's Initiative for Women in the Skilled Trades, a project with four components: recruitment, retention and placement, enforcement and education and technical assistance.
Employment Standards Administration's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) was assigned to supplement ETA's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) in enforcing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) in Apprenticeship.
BAT acts as the coordinating agency for implementing the Secretary's Order.
BAT, the Women's Bureau and OFCCP provided training to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of enforcement and compliance of Title 29 CFR Part 30, EEO in Apprenticeship.
The three agencies conducted five regional train-the-trainer sessions for field and key national office staff followed by training for OFCCP field compliance officers.
The Federal Committee on Apprenticeship, authorized under the National Apprenticeship Act of 1937 to advise the Secretary on apprenticeship concepts and programs, met three times in FY 1992 in Washington, D.C.
Discussions were held on apprenticeship's role in training the nation's work force; expanding the apprenticeship concept to all industries; recruiting more women into apprenticeship; overcoming barriers to expansion; linking apprenticeship to schools and other government training programs and examining government's role in an expanded apprenticeship system.
Currently, there are 822 federally recognized apprenticeable occupations.
Two were added in FY 1992: Cooling Tower Technician and Ġrinder Set-Up Operator, Jig.
In FY 1992, about 374,000 apprentices were trained in more than 42,000 civilian apprenticeship programs registered with BAT or state apprenticeship agencies.
About seven percent female and 22 percent minority apprentices were registered at year's end.
There were about 61,000 uniformed military apprentices registered in 17 programs, which included 34.3 percent minorities and 6.9 percent females.
More than 1,200 federally-serviced apprenticeship programs were reviewed for EEO compliance, and about 1,200 on-site quality reviews were conducted.
In FY 1992, over 25,000 workers received initial income support payments, and more than 20,000 workers entered training under the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program, authorized by the Trade Act of 1974.
It offers trade-impacted workers readjustment allowances, which extend the period for which unemployment insurance benefits are available and re-employment services, including training, job-search assistance and relocation allowances.
Mathematical Policy Research, Inc., under contract to the Department of Labor's Office of Strategic Planning and Policy Development, delivered a process and implementation report in July on how the TAA program operates at state level and how the major 1988 amendments were implemented.
They concluded that increased emphasis on outreach activities and training and coordination with related programs increased recipient use of re-employment services.
Most recent program services data support that conclusion.
The FY 1992 budgeted expenditure for allocation to states for TAA benefits (retraining, help with job search and relocation) is $72 million, compared to $65 million allocated to states in FY 1991.
One-hundred-fifty-four-million dollars are available for income support allowances in FY 1992.
Workers got $ll5.7 million in such allowances in FY 1991.
JTPA Performance Standards.
For PYs 1990-1991, there were six core measures with accompanying numerical standards for Title II-A programs: adult follow-up employment rate (62 percent of terminees); adult weekly earnings at follow-up ($204); follow-up welfare employment rate (51 percent of terminees); follow-up welfare weekly earnings ($182); youth entered employment rate (45 percent of youth terminees) and youth employability enhancement rate (33 percent of participants).
The adult and welfare follow-up measures indicate how a program contributes to long-term employability and economic self-sufficiency 13 weeks after a participant leaves the program.
The youth measures reinforce ETA's emphasis on employment and employability skills by focusing on the acquisition of education and vocational credentials and by redefining the youth entered employment rate to exclude from computation those who quit dropout prevention or recovery programs and do not obtain jobs.
For Title III in PY 1991, governors were required to set a 64 percent entered-employment-rate standard and encouraged to set an average wage-at-placement goal.
Governors continued to have the authority to modify national performance levels for both Title II-A and Title III to account for local conditions that could affect SDA performance, such as economic factors, characteristics of the population served and kinds of services provided.
ETA annually updates an adjustment methodology that helps governors set standards to prevent penalizing SDAs for serving the economically disadvantaged.
For PY 1991, Title IV Indian and native American grantees were required to meet three performance measures: entered employment; positive termination rate and employability enhancement rate.
They also had an optional community benefit project measure and a cost cap of $4,000 per participant.
Title IV migrant and seasonal farmworker grantees were required to meet two performance measures in PY 1991: entered employment rate and average wage at placement.
The Job Training for the Homeless demonstration program, authorized by the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act, forged stronger collaborative relationships between local JTPA agencies and the Department of Housing and Urban Development's local housing authorities in their efforts to offer more permanent employment and housing opportunities for the homeless.
The aim is to supply training, support and housing programs to increase employment opportunities, improve job retention and attain permanent housing for clients.
In FY 1992, 21 grantees ran projects under the demonstration, operated as a “second-chance" program and being evaluated by ETA.
ETA gave priority in FY 1992 to applicants who demonstrated the strongest commitments from employers and housing providers.
ETA provided $8.5 million to the program.
Research and demonstration activities in PY 1991 covered a number of workforce-related issues.
Several projects were sponsored with at least one other federal agency.
Three demonstrations, co-sponsored by the ETA and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and initially funded in PY 1990, were again funded in PY 1991.
The goal is to improve the well-being of children and their families.
Another joint initiative is testing ways to develop systematic links between the Department's job training and employment service delivery system and HHS's drug and alcohol treatment program and facilities.
The objective is to enhance rehabilitation by giving the target population a full range of services required for successful transition to stable employment.
The third joint-HHS project is to improve the employability of alienated youth and youth at risk of criminal behavior by giving alternatives to incarceration through interventions such as training and coordination with other resources.
Local public schools, human service agencies, the juvenile justice system and JTPA service deliverers are cooperating at three sites.
A new, 5-year, multi-site initiative co-sponsored by ETA and HHS began in October 1991 to demonstrate school-to-work transition training and support for moderate-to-severe developmentally disabled 13-25 year olds.
It features trained co-workers rather than job coaches to support youth in the workplace.
There were other developments in youth programs in PY 1992.
Several products from the youth research and technical assistance project were prepared for release.
A two-volume report will address topics from the effectiveness of federally funded youth programs to performance standards in training and employment.
Another product is a series of practitioner guides and staff training curricula which will outline effective strategies and best practices for serving youth most at risk.
Eight school-to-work demonstrations continued with the goals of keeping students in school and giving them marketable skills after graduation.
Projects vary from those that provide work experience in a variety of occupations to those that offer technical experience in specific occupational fields (electronics, medical technician tasks) or a technical education leading to post-high-school studies.
Another school-to-work demonstration project is to help disabled students make the transition to the workplace.
The Youth Opportunities Unlimited (YOU) initiative continued for a second year.
The 11 YOU projects (the seven original projects and four funded at the end of PY 1991) offer comprehensive training, employment and related services to youths in high-poverty areas of 10 cities and one rural area.
Goals are to achieve substantial gains in rates of high school completion and to achieve declines in teen pregnancy, crime and substance abuse.
Other projects suppoorted by ETA for another year were: the New Chance demonstration, co-funded with a number of private foundations, which gives economically disadvantaged teen parents comprehensive services, including parenting skills and literacy training; a school-to-work project for at-risk high school students and the Cities-in-School (CIS) program, which joins representatives of local governments, schools and the private sector to coordinate staff and financial resources and improve dropout prevention programs.
CIS is supported by private businesses, foundations, individuals and the Departments of Justice, Education, Commerce, HHS and Labor.
With the Departments of Education and HHS, the Department continued to fund, for up to 5 years, the National Center for Adult Literacy (NCAL), at the University of Pennsylvania.
NCAL is charged with improving the quality of literacy and basic skills services through research and dissemination activities.
The sponsors agreed to augment basic research activities each subsequent year.
Activities during the first and second years dealt with participation and service delivery, learning and instruction and planning and policy development.
In an ETA-supported literacy project, the Educational Testing Service (ETS) surveyed JTPA and UI/ES program participants to profile their workplace literacy levels and created a test to evaluate the literacy levels of members of these client populations.
ETS is now considering the use of the test in local JTPA, ES and UI offices.
Necessary Skills (SCANS).
Once developed, the survey items may be used in other population assessments, such as the National Assessment of Education Progress and the National Adult Literacy Survey.
Two new demonstrations were undertaken in PY 1991.
The Geriatric Demonstration Project is designed to demonstrate strategies and approaches for giving job opportunities to disadvantaged adults and youth as certified geriatric nurse's aides, home health care aides and personal home attendants and to develop career paths that will result in the upgrading of skills necessary to attain occupational advancement.
The Utah JTPA Demonstration Project is designed to develop automation strategies that will expedite use of JTPA changes in targeting, program quality, increased fiscal and program accountability and data collection.
A demonstration assessed problems and issues in implementing the American Society for Training and Development's (ASTD) Workplace Basics model for teaching basic workplace skills.
It concluded that the Workplace Basics Training Manual, developed for the Department by ASTD, is a sound plan for building employee development systems but that establishing a program in small-to-medium-sized businesses can be costly in the time and expertise needed to build an appropriate climate for employee development.
Another study documented the work of the North Carolina Governor's Commission on Workforce Preparedness.
The commission recommended improving delivery of public school education for secondary school students immediately bound for employment, upgrading community colleges' capacities to educate the unemployed and employed and establishing a permanent body to formulate préparedness policies.
Case studies of small to medium-sized employers in four states helped establish information for formulating policy on workplace education.
The study found that such businesses invest in workplace education to reduce errors and waste, to benefit workers and respond to customer pressure.
Five final reports and one interim final report on evaluation studies were issued during PY 1991, and a number of projects were renewed or extended.
Survey of Employer-Provided Training.
The study used survey data and tax records from 544 employers in Washington State to examine employer decisions to train low-wage workers.
There was an inverse relationship between the starting wage and the amount of employerprovided training.
Employers who hire low-wage employees often have limited expectations for employee job attachment and minimize training efforts, offering little opportunity for significant wage growth.
Targeted employment and training programs are likely to be more effective in mitigating low wages for certain workers over time, demographic trends can be expected to raise pressures for employer-provided training, and employment and training should pay more attention to job-search skills, emphasizing the value of employer-provided training rather than starting wages.
Labor Shortage Case Studies.
The study determined that there are many reasons for labor shortages including: government regulation, institutional barriers, sharply increased demand for particular goods, changes in technology and emergence of new specialties within fields.
Solutions include increasing salaries and benefits, changing government regulations, intensifying employer recruitment and increasing training and overtime.
Comparing Contracting Practices.
The study reported that performance-based contracting, compared to tuition (fixed price) contracting, leads to more job placements and reduces the time participants spend in training and job search.
However, tuition trainees placed in jobs earned higher incomes on average than performance-based trainees.
Performance-based contracting may be a more suitable adjunct to countercyclical policies seeking to reduce unemployment, while tuition contracting may be more suitable for promoting economic growth.
Policy Evaluation of Targeted Jobs Tax Credit.
A study of the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) found that effects are hard to measure, but it has been somewhat successful in obtaining jobs for target-group members at reasonable cost without seriously displacing other workers.
The report reviews the aims and legislative history of TJTC, its use by employers, vouchering and certification trends and TJTC's administration and costs.
Evaluation of the Homeless Job Training Demonstration.
The study evaluates the second funding cycle of the employment and training demonstration for homeless clients and compares performance to the first funding cycle.
In the 33 months of grant operations: 21,400 clients were served; more than 15,000 were trained; more than 7,000 were placed in unsubsidized jobs, 40 percent of whom were still employed after 13 weeks, and 7,000 had one or more housing upgrades.
There was an inverse correlation between the number of barriers to employment and employment success for homeless clients, who generally need services longer than the average JTPA client.
National JTPA Study Interim Report.
After 18 months under JTPA Title II-A adults had moderately higher earnings than members of the control group.
Results were disappointing for out-of-school youth.
Males had lower earnings than control-group members.
JTPA Title II-A appears to have had no impact on females.
The final report, covering 30 months, is scheduled for release in 1993.
Evaluation of the Homeless Job Training Demonstration.
This study is evaluating the Department's national training and employment demonstration for the homeless during PYs 1991 and 1992.
It includes a memorandum of understanding between HUD and the Department that spells out the intent to cooperate in offering permanent housing and long-term employment for clients.
Implementation of Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance (EDWAA).
The study is identifying and assessing organizational, administrative and operational designs, processes and problems in implementing EDWAA.
EDWAA Job Creation Demonstration.
Ten sites will be studied to see how effective a non-profit community development corporations is in creating employment and entrepreneurial opportunities for dislocated workers.
An 18-month extension allows evaluation of the second year of the demonstration and tracking longer-term results.
EDWAA Farmer and Rancher Demonstration.
This four-project demonstration looks at factors that aid or impede the success of training programs for dislocated farmers and ranchers.
It was extended for 15 months to allow another year of evaluation.
Rapid Response.
The project provides quick turn-around evaluation studies on specific JTPA issues.
Job Training Quarterly Survey Data Collection.
The Census Bureau samples, collects and processes data on enrollees and terminees in training funded under JTPA Titles II-A and III.
Data are delivered yearly to a contractor who analyzes a national sample of participants' characteristics, program experiences and results.
ETA's policy and planning activities in PY 1991 were to develop a strategy to improve the nation's ability to help workers compete globally and U.S. firms and labor organizations to improve productivity and product quality.
Legislation proposing to amend JTPA to improve the delivery of services to hard-to-serve youth and adults was not enacted by Congress.
Revised amendments were proposed by the Administration in 1991, and ETA staff continued to work in PY 1991 with congressional members and staff toward passage.
The four-year effort yielded the Job Training Reform Amendments of 1992 on September 5, 1992.
The revised amendments target JTPA programs on those seriously in need or at risk, enhance the quality of JTPA services, strengthen accountability and promote coordination of human resources programs serving the disadvantaged.
They also establish a year-round youth program of education, training and work.
Staff also developed two legislative proposals the Administration submitted to Congress in the spring of 1992: The Job Training 2000 Act and the Youth Apprenticeship Act of 1992.
The Job Training 2000 proposal would create a more comprehensive and coherent vocational training system to better meet the needs of employers and workers.
It seeks to streamline and improve the federal vocational training system by: increasing private sector involvement across federally funded vocational training programs; improving access to the system; enhancing the quality and accountability of services and enabling greater consumer choice.
The proposal would establish a network of skill centers for singlepoint access to vocational training programs in local communities, a certification system to ensure high quality programs and a voucher system to enhance participant choice.
Ten competitive grants will be awarded in early PY 1992 to local communities to demonstrate the potential of the proposal.
The Youth Apprenticeship Act was introduced in May 1992 to encourage public and private partnerships in developing voluntary youth apprenticeship programs in communities across the country.
See additional information under Office of Work-Based Learning).
Another legislative proposal recently announced is the New Century Workforce.
This is a long-term strategy of some $3 billion annually to ensure that American working men and woman have the skills they need to secure long-term employment in high-skill, high-wage jobs.
New Century Workforce builds on efforts to improve existing education and training programs reflected in AMERICA 2000 and Job Training 2000.
ETA officials also participated in numerous Congressional oversight and legislative hearings on such subjects as emergency unemployment compensation, school-to-work transition, SCANS, the Department's Native American programs, implementation of the Clean Air Employment Assistance provisions, the impact of defense downsizing, performance standards in human resource programs and adjustment assistance to workers who may be dislocated by the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Agency staff began drafting a paper to profile the amount, type and distribution of training American workers get from their employers, the number trained and if training was used to obtain a job or improve skills.
It also will identify high-performance workplaces, sources and further research needed in skills and training.
The State of The American Work Force will lay the ground work for subsequent annual reports to the nation.
The purpose of the preliminary paper and later annual reports is to encourage workers educators and trainers to think strategically about training.
Performance, which calls for a reorganization of education and work to close the workforce skills gap.
Five reports in ETA's Research and Evaluation Report Series were published in PY 1991.
These are: The Learning Disabled in Employment and Training Programs; Job Training for the Homeless: Report on Demonstration's First Year; Study of the Implementation of Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance Act; Economic Change and the American Workforce; Report on the Policy Academy on Families and Children At Risk.
ETA gave the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) funds to do an establishment survey that will be the first nationally representative data on employer-sponsored worker training.
ETA and BLS staffs developed the survey.
As part of its plan to improve labor market efficiency, the Department is revitalizing the U.S. Employment Service (ES).
The objectives of this initiative are to improve federal and state relations and communications and ES effectiveness.
Major revisions to the ES reporting system have been implemented; ES performance standards are being developed and information exchange forums are being planned as part of an expanded program of technical assistance to the states.
ES continued to serve the immediate needs of employers and jobseekers in PY 1991.
It registered 19.2 million applicants and provided reportable services to 10.4 million individuals.
Over 3.2 million were placed in jobs or obtained employment after receiving services.
Laborexchange expenditures were $745.2 million.
The ES expanded its efforts to reach new employers through the Employers'National Job Service Council (ENJŚC), now operating under a Department grant to the National Alliance of Business.
The Council, with a network of over 1,000 active Job Service Employer Committees involving some 40,000 firms, works to respond more effectively to the needs of ES and the employment and training community.
The ENJSC also works to keep other employers informed of the public employment service's ability to match employers with workers of all skills in all industries with emphasis on persons with disabilities and providing priority services to veterans.
Private Industry Councils to improve coordination with JTPA.
The participation of State Employment Security Agencies (SESA) in the Interstate Job Bank (IJB) showed increased use and improvement in PY 1991.
Thirty-five states merged IJB job listings weekly or updated them daily into their computerized job listings — readily available in all local employment offices with terminals.
Twenty-three SESA are also using telecommunications to receive job information from the IJB center.
At least 20 SESAs have a self-service job search system for jobseekers to search for their own jobs.
The Multi-State Job Bank project, using support from the IJB Center, also has been testing the feasibility of self-directed labor exchanges between job seekers and employers.
The user friendliness of the self-search computer program, known as Automated Labor Exchange, was improved, with Virginia and Maryland testing a system that allows employers to enter job orders directly into the ES job order system and select job applicants for interviews.
This project also has expanded services to veterans in selected locations.
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act, the Department of Labor certifies that the use of certain categories of foreign workers will not adversely affect the job opportunities, wages or working conditions of U. S. workers.
This is required by the Immigration and Naturalization Service as a condition for issuance of visas.
In FY 1991, 45,206 applications for permanent and temporary labor certifications for nonagricultural jobs were approved, and 21,553 temporary agricultural jobs were certified to be filled by non-immigrant foreign workers.
In PY 91, ETA continued work on a comprehensive review of the Dictionary Of Occupational Titles (DOT) and the occupational analysis system which produces it.
The DOT review is an initiative designed to ensure that the DOT becomes an effective tool for meeting the workforce challenges of the 1990's and beyond.
As the nation's most comprehensive source of occupational information, the DOT is uniquely positioned to help the Department shape its response to the issues of workplace changes and skills development.
To assist with the project, the Secretary of Labor appointed the Advisory Panel for the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (APDOT) to recommend strategies for developing, producing and disseminating a new DOT by February 1993.
In FY 1992, APDOT developed an interim report that clarified the approach and status of activities and solicited comments from interested persons and organizations on critical issues.
The report described activities undertaken, tentative findings and potential options for recommendations.
It also listed specific questions for review and comment.
The report was published in the Federal Register, and 5,000 copies were mailed to interested parties.
In 1991-92, the DOT review continued research on key project issues such as skills transferability and alternative job analysis techniques.
A series of working papers was developed on equivalent labor market tools currently used or under development by economic competitor nations, including: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
An OMB-approved survey of DOT users was conducted, and responses to the interim report were analyzed.
At the urging of the APDOT, ETA and BLS began to work together to ensure that the planned BLS revision of the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) and the current ETA revision of the DOT will be conceptually and technically compatible.
The primary goal of the cooperative Federal-State Occupational Analysis (OA) program is to maintain, update and improve the multi-purpose DOT database and resultant publications, including: the DOT, the Guide for Occupational Exploration and the Handbook for Analyzing Jobs.
Data collection, analysis and synthesis are accomplished by five Occupational Analysis Field Centers funded by reimbursable grants in North Carolina, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri and Utah.
In 1991-92, the OA system implemented a new software system to download and print the revised DÓT.
It also developed and distributed the revised, fourth edition DOT, a DOT training package and video program, a DOT data tape and the revised Handbook for Analyzing Jobs.
The Department of Labor is committed to improving the GATB and developing alternative assessment measures to help new, entry-level and experienced workers find jobs, training and other services which improve their employment potential.
USES Test Development Field Centers and State Test Research Units to identify the top high-performance, high-productivity units in the states to restructure the USES Test Development program to enhance its productivity and develop new or revised test products sensitive to today's diverse workforce.
Two related activities are underway to accomplish this task.
The first involves a series of research projects in response to major issues raised regarding the GATB in the report by the National Academy of Sciences on fairness-in-employment testing.
At the end of this research ETA will determine whether to support a revised GATB and to undertake revisions or to redesign it.
This will be supported by five Test Development Research Centers (TDRC).
The second will explore the use of job knowledge tests, skills assessment methodology, face validity, job family clustering and SCANS implementation.
By hiring new staff, contracting with experts, developing options papers and holding special conferences and seminars, the unit will research ways to develop new assessment instruments or adapt established tools to the new workplace and the technologies and the people who work there.
This research also is being supported by agreements with five new TDRCs.
When this restructuring effort is complete, ETA will be able to offer strong, centralized management and direction to its test development research activities, technical excellence through wider use of outside research specialists and professional credibility through review by nationally recognized experts.
Unemployment compensation claims increased in 1991.
Initial claims of 23.2 million were filed with state employment security agencies, resulting in $25.4 billion in benefits payments for 155.1 million weeks of unemployment.
The average weekly payment for total unemployment was about $170.
State unemployment tax revenues were $15.4 billion.
These claims began to decline in 1992.
Because of increasing outlays, state trust fund balances were reduced to $26.7 billion as of March 31, 1992 — a reduction of $7.1 billion from the previous March.
As of March 31, 1992, four states had outstanding loans.
ETA continued quality unemployment insurance (UI) initiatives during FY 1991 to improve the integrity of the program and to test new ways to accelerate and smooth the transition to reemployment for UI recipients.
The Quality Control (QC) program goal is to ensure that the UI program operates with the highest degree of accuracy and timeliness attainable with the administrative resources available.
The QC program currently produces extensive data on benefit payment accuracy.
Since first reported for 1988, the weighted average benefit overpayment rate for the UI system has fallen each year, from 10.1 to 7.4 percent in 1991.
States release their benefit payment accuracy rates to the general public; the Department later publishes a compendium of state results.
Also in the reporting period, UI has pursued the design of Revenue Quality Control (RQC).
Because of the complexity of UI tax systems, four modules are being developed.
The first, Core RQC, first tested in 1991-92, examines the accuracy, timeliness and completeness with which SESA conduct their internal tax operations.
It is scheduled for voluntary transition in FY 1993.
A design for the second, Benefit Charging, which builds on the Benefits of the QC program, was tested in FY 1991.
The two remaining modules, Employer Compliance and Reports Validation, are still in design.
In the mid-1980's, the Department began a series of demonstration projects to test new ways to use the UI system to assist UI recipients in their return to work.
Pennsylvania, Washington, Massachusetts and Maryland were participating in demonstration projects during the report period.
Based on results of the New Jersey UI Reemployment Demonstration Project and an earlier experimental project done by Illinois, a reemployment bonus — a cash incentive for early reemployment showed promise as an option for accelerating reemployment of UI recipients.
The reemployment bonus demonstration projects in Pennsylvania and Washington were to identify an optimum bonus offer by testing the effect of different amounts and times in which to qualify for a bonus.
Project operations for the reemployment bonus demonstrations were completed in FY 1990.
Surveys of project participants and a control group for both projects were completed in FY 1991, and research contractors for the demonstrations made final evaluations in FY 1992.
The Pennsylvania and Washington demonstrations show that reemployment bonuses had a significant impact on the job search behavior of eligible UI recipients.
The offer of a reemployment bonus for early return to work shortens the duration of unemployment among eligible claimants.
Higher bonus amounts and longer eligibility periods have stronger impacts on eligible claimants.
Most bonuses offered net benefits to claimants and society, but only a few options proved cost-effective.
The Department continued to study self-employment as an option for some UI claimants based on the experience of several European countries in the past decade.
UI Self-Employment Demonstration Projects in Washington and Massachusetts targeted UI recipients interested in self-employment to help them start their own microbusinesses (sole proprietorships with one or a few employees).
The projects are designed to give individuals self-employment allowance payments and business development services, such as business training, counseling, technical assistance and peer support.
The Washington demonstration, called the SEED Project, gave participants lump-sum seed capital equal to their remaining UI entitlement to help them with business start-up expenses.
The Massachusetts demonstration, the Enterprise Project, gives participants biweekly self-employment payments equal to their regular unemployment benefits as an income stream while they plan and establish their businesses.
The Washington demonstration ended in March, 1991.
In all, 755 UI recipients were selected in six local sites; an equivalent number was placed in a control group for comparison.
Four hundred fifty of those participants received lump-sum payments to start their own businesses, averaging $4,282 per person.
An interim report on this demonstration was published in FY 1992.
In Massachusetts the third and final year of project operations began in February, 1992 at seven sites.
By July, 1992 391 eligible recipients had entered the project, with 391 in a control group.
Participants were paid an average $536 each biweekly.
About half of them have started their own microbusinesses.
An interim report on this demonstration was published in FY 1992.
Work search is a complex issue in the UI system.
While one purpose of UI is to pay unemployed workers separated from jobs through no fault of their own, another is to promote their reemployment.
Ways to do this include reemployment services and the requirement that claimants search for suitable work.
In September 1991, the Department initiated a demonstration project to test the effects of alternative work search requirements on UI recipients'return to work.
Search Experiment.
Its purpose iş to determine how work search requirements can be made more effective and efficient.
Maryland will operate the project beginning in FY 1993.
In FY 1991, the Department continued to evaluate and improve the mechanisms for Performance Measurement Review (PMR) in the UIS oversight of SESA UI programs.
The intent of PMR is to produce a comprehensive and integrated performance measurement system to support the Secretary's oversight responsibilities and to help SESA improve UI program performance.
Because of the enormity of the task and cost considerations, the project is being done in increments.
Coordination with several other UI initiatives — benefits quality control, revenue quality control and cash management — is an integral part of the project.
The first phase, completed in January, 1992, has recommended improvements to the quality appraisal process: to better measure quality of the adjudication and appeal process and decisions and timeliness of payment, rather than measuring only part of the universe as is currently done; to improve the statistical validity of data and provide more reports so that information on deficient performance is timely.
The first phase also produced a field test design which is being further refined.
Phase II will include a field test of the alternative measures and if necessary, retesting.
Phase III will involve a nationwide implementation of revised measures.
As part of Phase III, SESA and federal staff will be trained in performance measurement.
ETA progressed in its major initiative to replace the existing grants and contracts financial management system with a more comprehensive and user-friendly PC-based network system.
In FY 1992, the basic financial management functions became operational in ETA's national office and six of its regional offices.
The remaining four regional offices will become operational by the middle of FY 1993.
When implemented, obligations, costs and payments all will be integrated with budget information in one system.
This system will be capable of combining financial information with performance measures and will serve all Department agencies responsible for grants and contracts management.
Financial management of five ETA national office grantees and four JTPA state grantees with perceived severe financial weaknesses were reviewed in detail.
ETA participated in developing or implementing new legislative and regulatory initiatives, including: government-wide task forces to revise OMB Circulars A-102 and A-110 and to implement the Cash Management Improvement Act; an ETA work group to develop final implementing regulations for the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 amendments to the Trade Adjustment Assistance Act; an ETA-wide task force to develop regulations for the Job Training Partnership Act amendments and a government-wide steering committee on Electronic Benefits Transfer.
Also in FY 1992, ETA resolved 339 audits and similar reports involving $133,940,872 in questioned costs.
Debts of $13,222,613 were targeted for collection.
Appeals for judicial or Secretarial review were filed on 33 of the FY 1992 final determinations; 166 cases were under appeal at the close of the fiscal year.
Resolution of 605 auditors'administrative recommendations occurred, and many administrative recommendations that were carried forward from prior years were implemented by the grantees and contractors.
ETA's internal accounting for expired or terminated grants and contracts closed the financial accounts of 251 grants and contracts facilitating recovery of $1,200,495.
On-site program and fiscal reviews were conducted, independent of program-office activities, on a sample of six national office programs.
These reviews focused on program operations and financial systems.
Issues included misclassification of costs, lack of cost-allocation plans, inadequate documentation for verification of participant eligibility and failure to follow government travel regulations.
Grantees were asked to take corrective action.
The Division of Special Review and Internal Control made 12 internal control reviews, surveys and management reviews to carry out ETA responsibilities under the Federal Managers'Financial Integrity Act.
A total of 693 pre-award clearance reviews were completed on potential ETA contractors/grantees.
Five investigations, internal or external, were conducted to determine compliance with legislative and regulatory requirements.
About 213 incidents of alleged fraud, abuse or other criminal activity were reported through ETA incident reports or the General Accounting Office/Office of Inspector General hotline system.
Corrective action was taken.
ETA collected about $6 million in cash and UI Trust Fund transfers for debts established by the audit resolution and closeout process.
Some 56 percent of these collections in FY 1992 related to CETA program debts and 35 percent to JTPA program debts.
The Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS) completed its 2-year mission with the publication of its final report, Learning a Living: A Blueprint for High Performance, in April, 1992.
High performance workplaces requiring better-skilled workers are essential to growth of the U.S.economy.
The report describes how the education and business sectors can create an economy that will maintain the nation's standard of living.
The contract is funded by the Department in collaboration with the Department of Education and Office of Personnel Management.
In Fy 1992, ETA's Office of Public Affairs supported all agency programs, policies and initiatives.
The office responded to many inquiries from news media, professional and trade organizations, public interest groups, business and associations, constituency organizations and private individuals.
There were 5,293 phone calls or visitors seeking information, 1,081 letters and 2,506 requests for publications — 8,880 responses in all.
Public Affairs handled some 1,300 news media calls on a range of subjects including Job Training 2000, National Youth Apprenticeship, New Century Workforce, summer jobs, unemployment insurance and the emergency extended benefits programs.
ETA Public Affairs issued over 200 news releases, including the 52 Weekly Unemployment Insurance Initial Claims reports.
The remaining releases involved programs, policies, funding or other announcements by the Secretary or Assistant Secretary for Employment and Training.
The volume of releases increased almost four times from that of the previous year.
The office also arranged or helped arrange nearly a dozen news conferences and other events, drawing hundreds of reporters from major print, electronic and trade media.
As a result, ETA programs received substantial news coverage, reflecting positively on the agency and the department.
Announcements ranged from SCANS, TEAMS (Training and Education for Mid- and Small-Size Firms) and New Century Workforce to Job Corps, the Job Training Partnership Act and others.
ETA Public Affairs arranged about 70 press interviews for the Assistant Secretary, his deputies or other program officials.
Many topics of interest paralleled major program or policy announcements by the Department or the White House.
Two noteworthy examples were Job Training 2000 and the New Century Workforce initiatives.
The office assumed primary responsibility for issuing the weekly Unemployment Insurance Initial Claims news releases and helped develop and staff the Department's new press room.
Each Thursday morning the office handled many calls from financial and other media and many more inquiries from both national and international financial institutions.
Working with the Office of Employment and Training Programs, Public Affairs helped coordinate the Fifth Annual JTPA Presidential Awards ceremony and helped produce the program booklet, other materials and media coverage for the awards.
Staff served as members of the SCANS task force helping to disseminate SCANS information and led production of Second To None, a full-length video on how SCANS skills can be used in highschool curricula.
Another video in which the office played a significant role was the production of Winning Combinations for the Office of Work-Based Learning.
The presentation looks at effective school-to-work transition programs around the country and provides viewers with ideas and suggestions for their own programs.
ETA Public Affairs also led in the promotion and outreach efforts of the Secretary's initiative to support women and minorities in the skilled trades.
This involves four agencies of the Department.
A multimedia campaign was initiated around the theme, Get the Skills that Pay the Bills.
Several products have been produced, and others are in production.
The campaign will begin in FY 1993.
ETA Public Affairs worked with Job Corps in its campaign to recruit more youth, particularly young women.
The office produced or coordinated news releases, feature stories, information packages, public service announcements, transit ads and other materials for print and broadcast media.
Public Affairs also produced or helped produce 35 publications, reports and other print materials for ETA's many program offices.
Included were such major publications as the various SCANS reports, the Job Training 2000 information package, the New Century Workforce publication, the Dictionary of Occupational Titles and the Training and Employment Report of the Secretary.
The best-selling Tips for Finding the Right Job, a booklet to assist job-seekers, was published in Spanish, the first major ETA publication to be translated into Spanish in many years.
Another breakthrough was production of the booklet and companion poster, Job Directions, to help individuals make the first step in entering ETA-supported employment and training programs.
Both the booklet and poster were widely distributed to Employment Service- Unemployment Insurance- and Job Training Partnership Act program offices for distribution.
In FY 1992, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) continued to improve the quality of national economic indicators and other essential statistics on employment, employment projections, unemployment, prices, compensation, working conditions, productivity and technology.
BLS continued to implement technical innovations for its Employment and Unemployment Statistics programs, made progress in cooperation with the Census Bureau on a comprehensive multi-year revision of the Current Population Survey and issued new reports on topical labor force issues.
The Bureau neared completion of a long-term revision which will substantially improve international price data, expanded coverage and sampling of key industries for the Producer Price Index program, initiated a housing sample rotation for the Consumer Price Index, accelerated release schedules for the Consumer Price Index and Producer Price Indexes and began to improve procedures for collecting expenditure information on small or frequently purchased items.
The Employment Cost Index program was expanded to include employer costs for health insurance; results from the first metropolitan areas surveyed for locality pay adjustments specified by the Federal Employees Pay Comparability Act of 1990 were published; a newlydesigned census of fatal occupational injuries was implemented and design and testing of a statistical system for characterizing disabling injuries and illnesses was completed.
BLS published measures of productivity for business, manufacturing and government sectors, selected industries and foreign countries; issued reports on implications of technological change in selected industries; gave technical assistance to statistical agencies in Eastern Europe, Central Europe and Mexico and established a special task force to evaluate and improve productivity measures.
Economic, labor force, industry, and occupational projections for 1990-2005 were issued.
BLS responded to the increasingly challenging task of measuring the overall performance of the economy by improving virtually every stage of the statistical process.
To meet the needs of policymakers and analysts, BLS launched three new products: a first-time news release, developed by staff in the new Foreign Direct Investment program, reported on employment and wages in foreign-owned establishments; a series of reports, to track the impact of cutbacks in defense-related spending and contracting outlined trends in local labor markets with significant levels of defense-dependent employment and contributed to the new Issues in Labor Statistics, which cover recent labor-force trends and unemployment.
BLS analyzed the employment and unemployment impacts of the recession that began in mid-1990, which included a special survey of worker displacements.
The survey, one of a series, has been conducted biannually since 1984.
This is the first time agriculture's occupational employment structure has been surveyed nationally.
It conducts computer-assisted telephone interviews designed to improve the timeliness and accuracy of data collected from business establishments.
Another initiative expanded self-reporting by touchtone data entry or voice recognition to more than 20,000 business units.
To help users improve the quality of surveys, data processing and economic analysis, BLS developed and tested the first National Survey of Users of Employment and Unemployment Statistics.
It will help BLS analyze product and service quality and chart new directions for improvements.
The Office of Prices and Living Conditions emphasized improving the quality, timeliness and coverage of its data.
BLS continued to make monthly Consumer Price Index (CPI) information available to the public sooner by releasing figures a day earlier and sending the CPI Detailed Report to subscribers two weeks earlier.
BLS helped users assess the accuracy of the CPI by calculating and publishing standard errors of price change from 1987 to 1991.
BLS initiated a CPī housing sample rotation which replaces older units with new units on a five-year cycle.
Also, BLS began planning for a decennial revision of the CPI and made progress in developing an experimental inter-area CPI.
BLS improved the timeliness for Producer Price Indexes (PPI), accelerating the initial release by two to three days and getting the PPI periodical to subscribers more than two weeks earlier.
BLS updated weights for the PPI from 1982 values of shipments to 1987 values.
Under an initiative to improve federal economic indicators, BLS increased the pace of expanding coverage of service industries and began sampling selected high-tech industries more often.
The International Price Program entered the fourth year of its first major revision.
As part of the revision, BLS began publishing import indexes by country of origin and region.
Work continued to rebase the weights for this program to 1990.
In addition, under the Federal Economic Indicators improvement initiative, BLS accelerated progress to expand the coverage of service industries; transferred the processing of international price data to microcomputers and stayed on schedule with the initiative to produce monthly, rather than quarterly, data.
To deliver more guidance to survey participants, the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES) program tested and analyzed a new Diary Survey questionnaire for collecting expenditure information on small or frequently purchased items.
BLS also sought to improve CES publications and public use tapes by surveying data users.
BLS published varied information on collective bargaining and labormanagement relations, including data on the size of major collective bargaining settlements, major work stoppages, labor organization membership and scheduled bargaining activity.
The Employment Cost Index (ECI) program began publishing employer costs for health insurance.
An examination of these data appeared in a Monthly Labor Review article.
The program also began issuing wage and compensation indexes for nursing and personal care facilities and employer costs for the compensation of civilian workers.
Work continued on integrating the ECI and Employee Benefits Survey programs.
Principal activities included a survey of user needs and an examination of the type of data, especially related to health insurance, that can be obtained from the surveys.
BLS also published survey data for employee benefit plan provisions in state and local governments.
BLS gave much effort to designing a new survey to supply data needed for locality pay adjustments under the Federal Employees Pay Comparability Act of 1990.
It offers greatly expanded data on wages by occupation and area for use in setting pay of federal workers.
In the year, BLS published data based on the new survey for five metropolitan areas.
Working with 31 states, BLS completed the first implementation phase of its Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries.
Results of the 1991 census and prior years'testing appeared in the Monthly Labor Review and Compensation and Working Conditions.
BLS published a news release, a summary report and a comprehensive bulletin on national results of the latest Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses.
To meet the demand for local data on injuries and illnesses, staff processed and extracted information on many states and territories from the annual survey and from the BLS Supplementary Data System.
To help employers evaluate their injury and illness experience, staff prepared and mailed five industry guides to some 250,000 employers.
Productivity trends in the United States continued to attract the attention of business and government leaders, economists and informed citizens.
BLS responded to the need for timely and accurate information by continuing to extend and refine its measures of productivity and costs.
BLS modified its quarterly measures of business sector and manufacturing productivity to keep up with a series of benchmark revisions to source statistics, including the Commerce Department's national income and product accounts, the Federal Reserve Board's production indexes and the BLS establishment survey.
BLS gave special attention to the effects on productivity growth of business investment in computers.
BLS introduced a multifactor productivity measure for railroad transportation and industry labor productivity measures for crude petroleum and natural gas production; fresh or frozen prepared fish; wood containers and bolts, nuts, rivets and washers.
BLS now issues 178 separate labor productivity measures for industries in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communications and service sectors of the economy.
BLS updated productivity measures for the federal government.
These measures included 23 years of historical data for 28 functional groupings of federal agencies representing 64 percent of the federal civilian workforce.
In response to continued public interest, BLS assessed the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
BLS worked on several research projects: A task force reviewed the methodology used to construct industry productivity measures; another planned conceptual work on service sector output measurement.
Staff wrote a paper evaluating quarterly productivity measures during business cycles and continued to assess indirect effects of research and development on productivity.
BLS updated comparative trend measures of manufacturing labor productivity and unit labor costs in 12 industrial countries plus unit labor costs in Korea and Taiwan.
BLS renewed efforts to develop manufacturing multifactor productivity measures for Germany.
BLS also updated measures of comparative levels of hourly compensation costs in 30 countries or areas for total manufacturing and 39 component manufacturing industries, as well as the series on international comparisons of the labor force and unemployment in 10 industrial countries.
These measures assess the economic performance of the United States relative to other industrial countries and provide insights into the changing competitive position of manufacturers in the United States.
BLS conducted nine labor statistics seminars of 3 to 8 weeks in Washington, D.C. for some 100 participants from 36 countries.
Special study programs were held for 34 participants from 12 countries.
In the year, 368 foreign visitors from 60 countries came to the U.S. to consult with BLS.
Staff provided on-site technical assistance in 15 countries.
BLS continued its substantial technical aid to economists and statisticians in Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia by developing statistical systems appropriate for market economies.
BLS also gave this help to Bulgaria, Rumania, Estonia, Ukraine and Russia.
Some 55 participants from Central and Eastern Europe attended BLS seminars or special study programs held in Washington, D.C.
BLS continued cooperation with Mexico by hosting a meeting of Mexican and U.S. federal statisticians.
There were three seminars in Mexico in cooperation with the Secretariat of Labor and Social Welfare and the National Institute of Statistics, Geography and Information.
Topics included industrial employment and earnings statistics, the informal economy, measuring productivity, using employment statistics and seasonal adjustment of employment time series.
Five Mexican statisticians participated.
As part of its regular biennial program, BLS issued economic, labor force, industry and occupational projections for 1990-2005.
The projections appeared in a news release and in five Monthly Labor Review articles.
Three other articles in the Review evaluated the accuracy of BLS projections for 1990.
Additional analytical articles covered scientific and technical employment to 2005, reconciling conflicting data on jobs and future jobs for college graduates.
BLS issued several other publications based on the new projections.
These included the 1992-93 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook, Occupational Projections and Training Data, Outlook: 1990- 2005 and a new career guidance publication, Career Guide to Industries.
The Occupational Outlook Quarterly presented a graphic summary of the 1990-2005 projections and articles summarizing the job outlook by occupation and for college graduates.
Other topics included lesser known jobs in health care, finding summer work and occupational advancement.
BLS continued to improve the quality of statistical products by researching and evaluating economic concepts and methodologies.
Highlights included: evaluating test data to select questions for the redesigned Current Population Survey; analyzing conceptual issues in price measurement; using experimental results to determine cost effective stratification schemes for the telephone-based Consumer Price Index outlet sampling frame; improving cost weight estimation for the Consumer Price Index; examining the impact of changes in workers' compensation benefits on fatal and nonfatal injury rates; investigating the impact of a college diploma on wages and estimating means and medians from open interval data.
BLS expanded output from the National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS) and initiated a new regular publication, Work and Family, which features analysis of survey data.
Special efforts were made to obtain and process pension plan descriptions for participants in the Mature Women's Survey.
In addition, BLS released to the public a CD-ROM containing data from all the original cohorts and produced a new user's guide for NLS survey data.
BLS completed the long-sought consolidation of its national office staff at a single site, the Postal Square Building, 2 Massachusetts Avenue, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20212.
Sample Selection.
BLS implemented a system which permits statisticians to update selection criteria via on-line screens instead of submitting memoranda specifying necessary changes, thus improving the timeliness for sample selection.
Survey Controls.
The Bureau developed a Local Area Network (LAN) survey control system which enables field economists to report the collection status of occupational compensation surveys.
The system prepares summary reports on the survey status so managers can allocate resources based on up-to-date reports from field staff.
Data Capture.
BLS developed a microcomputer-based system of Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing for the collection of Current Employment Statistics data.
Based on a respondent's answer to one question, the system automatically skips to the next appropriate question, thus making possible more complicated skip patterns than were feasible previously.
Also installed was an advanced optical character reader to capture producer price data from fixed-format forms completed by respondents.
This technology requires less human intervention in transforming the data into machine-readable form and speeds processing time.
Data Analysis.
A variance calculation system for the Consumer Price Index was implemented, with five years of data published and a new microcomputer-based processing system for the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries was implemented.
The system uses a relational database to increase flexibility in making queries.
A menu-based user interface makes it more accessible to infrequent users.
Other significant accomplishments.
BLS implemented technical and managerial improvements in the operation of the LAN to ensure that its computing facilities are reliable and robust enough to handle greatly expanded statistical production work.
The network's reliability improved by 19 percent during the year.
The Bureau completed transition from single-function 3270 terminals and cluster controllers to LAN-based 3270 gateways.
All LAN workstations now can access the mainframe computer center.
This is an important step in achieving the goal of providing access to all BLS computing facilities from a single desktop machine.
BLS began transition to a new LAN operating system which provides greater security for sensitive data and a richer environment for statistical production work; significantly expanded computing options available on the LAN by introducing high-performance servers which support remote computation and data base applications; implemented a telecommunications infrastructure for BLS'new Postal Square Building to make possible more reliable LAN services, better and faster access to mainframe services from personal computer workstations and high-speed file transfers between the LAN and the mainframe; awarded a major contract for mainframe processing services; prepared a five-year strategic plan and transmitted it to the Directorate of Information Resources Management and continued work on the BLS-Census Bureau Current Population Survey project by helping with database design and technical issues related to connecting BLS to the data bases at the Census Bureau.
BLS completed arrangements for conducting a survey of employer provided training.
The survey will be funded by the Employment and Training Administration.
BLS worked with the Department to tighten security procedures for economic data during embargo periods.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) issued six final standards, two proposed rules and one advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR), all designed to improve worker safety and health in fiscal year (FY) 1992.
Final standards included occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens, 4,4'-Methylene- dianiline, formaldehyde, cadmium and process safety management of highly hazardous chemicals.
Also, OSHA issued a final rule excluding non-asbestiform tremolite, anthophyllite and actinolite from coverage under the agency's asbestos standard.
Proposed rules covered methylene chloride and new or permissible exposure limits (PELs) in the construction, agriculture, and maritime sectors for hundreds of toxic and hazardous air contaminants.
The ANPR covered ergonomic safety and health management.
OSHA conducted more than 41,000 inspections in FY 1992.
The number of state plan inspections were estimated at 70,000.
The agency also reported several active corporate settlement agreements involving citations for safety and health violations in a single plant.
OSHA coordinated the review of 10 egregious cases, of which seven were concluded, and proposed $86.1 million in federal penalties.
There were levies of $42.2 million in state penalties.
The agency promoted cooperation with other federal agencies to promote safety and health by signing a memorandum of understanding with the Department of Energy.
With the Federal Aviation Administration, OSHA set up procedures for more effective safety and health protection for airport-based airline personnel.
OSHA also investigated accidents and testified to Congress on enforcement activities.
In FY 1992, the Directorate of Health Standards Programs published five final standards and two proposed standards.
In a final rule on June 8, 1992 OSHA excluded non-asbestiform tremolite, anthophyllite and actinolite from coverage under its asbestos standards.
The evidence was insufficient to conclude that nonasbestiform varieties of asbestos minerals present the same type or magnitude of health risk as does asbestos.
OSHA published a final rule on occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens on December 6, 1991.
It is expected to protect more than five million workers against the hazards of AIDS and hepatitis B viruses and other bloodborne pathogens.
Among the workers protected are those in hospitals, physicians'and dentists' offices, clinics, nursing homes, blood banks, law enforcement, fire, rescue and correctional facilities, research laboratories and the funeral industry.
The standard protects workers through the use of engineering and work-practice controls, personal protective equipment, training, medical follow-up of exposure incidents, hepatitis B vaccination and other provisions.
On May 27, 1992, OSHA published final amendments to its formaldehyde standard.
The changes should provide additional protection for 84,000 workers who are exposed to formaldehyde at levels between 1.0 parts per million (ppm) of air, the existing permissible exposure limit (PEL), and 0.75 ppm (the proposed PEL).
About 59,000 work in the apparel industry, 11,000 are in the furniture industry and 6,100 in foundries.
The amendments lower the PEL for formaldehyde from the existing level of 1 ppm as an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA) to an 8-hour TWA of 0.75 ppm.
They also include medical removal protection for employees who suffer from formaldehyde exposure.
On August 10, 1992, OSHA published a final rule that limits occupational exposure to 4,4'-Methylenedianiline to an 8-hour TWA of 10 parts per billion (ppb) and establishes a short-term exposure limit of 100 ppb.
This regulation also requires medical surveillance, exposure monitoring, hygiene facilities, engineering controls and work practices, proper respirator use and recordkeeping.
The standard applies to all exposed employees in general industry and in the construction and maritime industries.
OSHA published a final rule on September 14, 1992 limiting worker exposure to cadmium.
The Agency estimates some 512,000 workers are exposed to cadmium in a wide variety of industries and occupations, including nickel-cadmium battery production, electroplating, maintenance painting and lead and zinc production.
Cadmium exposure also results from workers using cadmium in pigments and plastics production and at cadmium production facilities.
On February 24, 1992, the Directorate of Safety Standards Programs published a final rule for Process Safety Management of Highly Hazardous Chemicals.
The new standard aims to prevent workplace catastrophes or minimize the consequence of workplace incidents that involve fires, explosions or releases of dangerous substances.
The standard requires systems analysis to determine and control industry processes for handling highly hazardous chemicals.
It will protect employees from exposure to toxic, highly reactive, flammable or explosive chemicals.
The affected industries include manufacturers of toxic chemicals, explosives, pyrotechnics, refined petroleum and others.
On November 7, 1991, OSHA published a proposal to reduce its current standard of 500 parts methylene chloride (MC) per million parts of air (500 ppm) averaged over 8 hours to an 8-hour TWA of 25 ppm.
The lower PÉL would reduce cancer risk by 95 percent for more than 186,000 workers.
The proposal also includes provisions for exposure monitoring, engineering controls, respiratory protection when engineering controls are insufficient, medical surveillance, emergency plans, hazard communication, selection and maintenance of personal protective equipment and recordkeeping.
Hearings were held in September, 1992 in Washington, DC, and in October, 1992 in San Francisco.
On June 12, 1992, OSHA proposed new, lower PELs in the construction, agriculture and maritime sectors for hundreds of toxic and hazardous air contaminants.
OSHA estimates the new PELs could prevent 31,000 illnesses and save as many as 13 lives annually.
The standard will lessen workers' exposure to contaminants known to cause heart disease, cancer, neurological disorders, eye disorders and lung, liver and kidney diseases.
On August 3, 1992 OSHA published its ANPR on ergonomic safety and health management.
Responses to the ANPR will be used to determine whether to propose a specific or a general standard and how comprehensive it should be.
OSHA asked for submissions of relevant data and comments by February 1, 1993.
OSHA continued to develop proposals on glycol ethers, lead in construction, respiratory protection, final standards covering asbestos (ordered by court remand), 1,3-butadiene, hazard communication (FY 1988 proposal) and methods of compliance.
The directorate continued work on other regulatory activities proposed in earlier fiscal years but not yet complęted at the end of FY 1992.
This will also permit more information or comment on whether the scope should be expanded and on issues brought out by OSHA's proposed general industry confined spaces standard.
The proposal was published January 26, 1990; on February 10, 1992 the record was reopened until March 26, 1992, and later, to May 26, 1992.
The review was based on the findings of a consultant's study initiated in August, 1991 and completed in January, 1992.
Other development projects underway include finalizing standards on scaffolds in construction, occupant protection in motor vehicles, logging operations, walking and working surfaces, personal fallprotection equipment and personal protective equipment.
Proposed standards in various stages of development include lockout in construction work, powered-industrial-truck operator training and crane safety.
Shipyard employment standards being reviewed before development of proposed rules include access and egress, personal protective equipment and fall protection.
The Shipyard Employment Standards Advisory Committee, which advises the shipyard industry on OSHA's maritime rulemaking and program planning, was rechartered and held several committee and subcommittee working meetings during the year.
The Advisory Committee on Construction Safety and Health, which advises the construction industry on OSHA's construction rulemaking and program planning, held several committee and subcommittee working meetings during the year.
In FY 1992, the agency responded to the tragic fire of September 3, 1991 at the Imperial Food Products poultry processing plant in Hamlet, NC, where 25 workers died and 56 others were injured.
Heeding Congressional and public concerns about the effectiveness of stateoperated OSHA programs, the Office of State Programs extensively investigated and evaluated North Carolina's safety and health program.
OSHA's special evaluation report in January, 1992 identified seven deficiencies in the state's program.
When North Carolina failed to respond satisfactorily to these problems or deficiencies within 90 days, OSHA initiated action to withdraw approval of the North Carolina plan.
OSHA suspended this process in June pending fulfillment of specific state commitments to correct deficiencies.
OSHA continues to monitor the state's actions.
Prompted by the tragedy in Hamlet, the agency made comprehensive reevaluations of all complete state plans (covering private and public sectors) to assure the Secretary of Labor and Congress that necessary standards of protection were being maintained.
Reports sent to 22 States in January, 1992 set an August 1, 1992, deadline for correcting all identified deficiencies or for demonstrating significant progress in correcting them.
The Office of State Programs applied what it had learned to a special State Evaluation Project to continue revising procedures for monitoring and evaluating state programs.
A task group met several times to coordinate and consolidate previous work on a revised State Plan Policies and Procedures Manual.
The Federal Steering Committee and the Occupational Safety and Health State Plan Association's directors met to lead the group and review the revised monitoring and evaluating system.
Also monitored were state responses to new federal legislation that increased OSHA penalties sevenfold.
Twenty-two of the 23 States with plans covering the private sector and state and local governments enacted legislation reflecting the federal changes.
The Office reviewed and analyzed standards-promulgation procedures of every state with its own safety and health plan to determine the nature and impact of ongoing problems.
OSHA emphasized the requirement that states adopt worker safety and health standards within 6 months following issuance of new or amended federal standards.
As a result of some 25,000 worksite visits conducted by OSHA consultants, employers corrected about 85,000 serious safety and health hazards in FY 1992.
The consultation program continued to help employers with difficult safety and health issues such as compliance with OSHA's hazard communications standard, the new bloodborne pathogens standard, ergonomics and indoor air quality.
Free advice is given on safety and health problems.
Smaller employers in high-hazard industries get priority.
This is the first full year in which consultants were authorized to respond to requests for assistance from farmers, in accord with OSHA's agriculture initiatives.
The Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) recognize worksites that effectively reduce injuries and illnesses by implementing outstanding management-based safety and health programs.
In FY 1992, after conducting safety and health evaluations, OSHA approved 22 sites for VPP participation, bringing the total to 100 sites.
Of those, OSHA reapproved two sites after 9 years of their maintaining outstanding programs, nine after 6 years, and seven after 3 years.
This experiment began in October, 1991.
A cooperative project of OSHA, the Alliance of American Insurers and the American Insurance Services Group, Inc., the project targeted six industries with large concentrations of small businesses in Georgia.
Working with the State Consultation Project at the Georgia Institute of Technology, it identifies serious, costly hazards, finds low-cost, big-payoff solutions and furnishes them to small employers.
Initial efforts resulted in a movement to include in any future endeavors other interested parties, such as labor groups, employer organizations, universities, professional safety and health societies and state government agencies.
The OSHA Training Institute trained about 8,000 federal and state compliance officers, state consultants, other federal personnel and private-sector people in FY 1992.
Among the 73 courses offered for noncompliance personnel were short courses on respiratory protection, principles of ergonomics and machine guarding.
The Office of Training and Education developed training and information materials and presented a train-the-trainer seminar to about 200 participants as part of the agency's effort in the new bloodborne pathogens standard.
A slide program on chemical process safety management also was distributed to OSHA field offices.
In FY 1992, $1.2 million in grants were awarded to 14 organizations under the Targeted Training Program for training and education in logging safety, bloodborne disease prevention, the hazards of lead in construction and safe electrical work practices.
Another $370,000 were awarded to 6 organizations under the New Directions grant program to nonprofit organizations to develop their staff, skills and services as competent job safety and health centers.
The Office of Field Programs coordinated a wide variety of activities in FY 1992 aimed at improving the agency's inspection programs and other field issues.
A major initiative, OSHA 2000, will modernize the inspection process.
Agency representatives were assembled to consider the use of enhanced technology for future investigations.
The Office of Field Programs will conduct a demonstration project to test the feasibility of this technology in 10 area offices and two State Plan states.
All compliance safety and health officers in the test offices will get video cameras and special applications software for use on laptop and personal computers.
These efforts are intended to expedite case file documentation and retrieval and improve the overall quality of OSHA's case files.
In FY 1992, the Office of Field Programs further developed OSHA's Employee Involvement and Quality Improvement (ÉIQI) project, a labor-management effort to extend employee participation to regional and field offices.
There is a union-management pairing in each region to coordinate EIQI activities at the local level.
Regional efforts in EIQI have included helping develop the FY 1993 performance plans, implementing EIQI work group recommendations, providing regional EIQI orientation, assessing training needs and initiating area office EIQI projects.
In addition, the Office of Field Programs coordinated the field's planning process for FY 1993.
Regional administrators encouraged all field employees to participate in developing their regional plans.
They used EIQI principles when appropriate and made sure that all planned field activities were designed to support the agency's national goals.
The regions had the flexibility to develop programs best suited to conditions in their regions, including the development of local emphasis programs to address safety and health hazards in industries that might not be inspected under national inspection targeting programs.
In FY 1992, staff from the Office of Field Programs conducted onsite audits of five regional offices and five area offices to ensure that field offices operate the highest quality programs possible to conform with agency policies and procedures.
The Office of Field Programs monitored 25 active corporate-wide settlement agreements to make sure that more than 1,100 worksites complied with specified abatement obligations.
As part of this effort, the Office of Field Programs briefs the Assistant Secretary and furnishes memoranda to the Secretary on these cases.
In FY 92 the Directorate of Compliance Programs coordinated the review of 10 egregious OSHA violations cases.
Reviewed were citations for cases involving IMC Fertilizer ($11.3 million) and McCrory Stores ($3.2 million).
FederaI OSHAproposed penalties in FY 92 were $86.1 million.
State OSHA-proposed penalties were $42.2 million.
OSHA negotiated corporate-wide settlement agreements with companies such as IMC Fertilizer/Angus Chemical Co. (process safety system), ConAgra Poultry Co. (ergonomics and record keeping), United Parcel Service (hazardous material handling) and J.C. Penney Co., Inc. (ergonomics).
The directorate also coordinated the agency's petrochemical special emphasis program.
It focuses on areas in petrochemical plants that are prone to catastrophic accidents.
Under guidance from the Directorate of Compliance, inspectors completed six comprehensive chemical plant inspections lasting an average of 4 months and began four additional inspections in FY 92.
OSHA continued a wide range of compliance activities for the 3.2 million federal employees.
These activities included responding to federal employee reports of hazards and reprisals, developing a federal agency targeted inspection list and giving technical assistance and training.
The directorate also revised Chapter XIII of the OSHA Field Operations Manual, which sets policy for compliance in the federal sector, consulted with federal agency safety and health professionals concerning abatement methods and standards interpretations and responded to numerous information requests from the public, the media and Congress.
Departments of Veterans Affairs and Labor, the U.S. Panama Canal Commission and the U.S. Soldiers' and Airmen's Home.
Directorate staff, with the Federal Advisory Committee on Occupational Safety and Health and the National Safety Council, conducted the 46th Annual Federal Agency Safety and Health Conference in New Orleans in October 1991.
OSHA also worked with other federal agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency, the Centers for Disease Control and the Departments of Housing and Urban Development and Transportation, to develop health strategies for lead, hazardous waste, indoor air quality and infectious diseases.
The directorate guided field inspectors and the public in compliance with OSHA health standards, most notably the standard on occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens.
Health standards-related directives finalized in FY 92 focused on bloodborne pathogens, lead in construction and emergency response.
More than 20 presentations on bloodborne pathogens and others on lead and hazardous waste were made.
The directorate also worked with other OSHA staff to produce fact sheets, pamphlets and a video production on the bloodborne pathogens standard for distribution to OSHA field staff and to the public.
Directorate staff, in administering the OSHA Maritime Accreditation and Crane Certification regulations, oversaw accreditation of 133 agencies that inspected and certified the safe working condition of more than 10,000 maritime cranes.
The directorate's Office of Whistleblower Protection Programs completed 3,377 investigations of alleged discrimination cases to provide protection for employees under Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, Section 211 of the Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act and Section 7 of the International Safe Container Act.
In FY 1992, the Directorate of Technical Support continued activities begun in 1991 relating to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) between the U.S. and Mexico.
The Department of Labor (not as part of NAFTA) is conducting a number of studies and joint initiatives with Mexico.
Many of these deal with occupational safety and health.
In October and November 1991, staff participated in a series of meetings sponsored by the Mexican Secretariat of Labor and Social Welfare and the Mexican Institute of Social Security.
The meetings, conducted by the local manufacturing associations, were attended by mid- and upper-level managers, safety and health managers, governors' representatives and the governor of Mexicali.
Some 150 persons attended each meeting.
Another meeting took place in late November with about 488 participants from government, labor, industry, academia and the medical community.
The Directorate of Technical Support was significantly involved in various major OSHA programs and projects, such as laboratory analysis, occupational health nursing, occupational medicine, ergonomics, testing laboratories, information dissemination and publishing.
The directorate gave technical guidance to agency staff and the public on several issues involving lead in construction, respiratory protection, equipment evaluation and compliance assistance by means of the OSHA Technical Manual.
As part of agency efforts to reduce construction workers' exposure to lead, the directorate developed a new chapter for the OSHA Technical Manual on lead in construction.
It outlines procedures for CSHOs to assist in hazard evaluation and control of exposure to lead in construction.
Although the manual is mainly for OSHA CSHOs, chapters on composite technology, lasers and robots are included.
It is available to the public.
The directorate issued a series of hazard information bulletins on conditions involving unrecognized hazards.
They alert inspectors and others to conditions with potential for serious accidents.
Issues covered in 1992 include chemical properties and safe handling of calcium hypochlorite; an unapproved electrical device - "Volt Stick;" aerial platforms used in bridge inspections; use of metric-sized wedges in boom anchor systems; hydraulic systems'preventive maintenance; crane modifications and a seat-tilt stop mechanism.
The directorate continued to furnish technical support and engineering control feasibility studies to the field.
It completed requisitions for new equipment required for enforcement, evaluated performance of heat stress monitoring equipment and new control technology used on hazardous waste sites, reviewed a proposed compliance directive on the chemical process safety management standard and handled referrals from other offices on the standard.
All national office personnel required to visit sites were trained in respiratory protection at the OSHA Training Institute.
OSHA's program that evaluates and approves qualified safety testing laboratories continues to expand.
It requires that laboratories applying for OSHA certification meet specific criteria as defined in 29 CFR 1910.7 to become Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratories.
The laboratories are authorized to approve specific products for the workplace.
In FY 1992, several applications were received, including some from foreign-based laboratory organizations, and the agency published preliminary decisions in the Federal Register for four of them.
Should these four applicants be approved, there will be 11 laboratories accredited by OSHA.
In ergonomics, OSHA gave technical support for field inspecting and monitoring of meat-packing plants and facilities of the U.S.Postal Service.
The directorate evaluated work stations within the Department of Labor and at several other federal agencies.
Computerized software systems now enhance the directorate's ergonomics modelling capability based on videotapes of the biomechanics of work tasks.
The Salt Lake City Technical Center (SLTC) supported OSHA's compliance programs by processing 51,700 samples involving more than 145,000 chemical analyses and helped with 13 litigated cases.
SLTC also responded to more than 10,000 calls for technical assistance and provided protocols for more than 1,800 analytical methods to industry and the public.
SLTC produced the first OSHA CD-ROM containing selected program and technical information from the OSHA Computerized Information System (OCIS).
OSHA regulations, technical manuals and compliance directives are included.
The information is updated quarterly and distributed to all OSHA offices, state program offices and state consultation offices.
The Government Printing Office is distributing more than 2,000 copies for public sale and government depository libraries.
SLTC evaluated laboratories doing blood-lead analyses to determine if procedures comply with the accuracy provisions of OSHA's lead standard before including the labs on OSHA's approved labs list.
OSHA approved about 175 such laboratories in FY 92.
Quarterly lists of approved labs are available on OCIS.
The SLTC gave state reporting requirements and technical assistance to OSHA offices, the National Park Service, the California Department of Health and the Ohio Attorney General's Office.
Additional activities included: developing draft investigative guidelines for Legionnaire's Disease; formulating draft audit guidelines for determining compliance with the process safety management standard; helping with on-site industrial hygiene for 52 projects; giving technical support to the Directorate of Health Standards Programs on the cadmium standard and helping the U.S. Department of Labor's Mine Safety and Health Administration develop procedures for compliance monitoring.
In FY 92, the directorate's two occupational health nursing staff members supported the agency's activities in bloodborne pathogens and ergonomics.
One helped coordinate a conference sponsored with the Centers for Disease Control and the Food and Drug Administration on the prevention of device-mediated bloodborne infections and served as the agency representative to the Healthy People 2000 Task Force on AIDS.
Nursing personnel supported agency activities on ergonomics.
One member serves on the American National Standards Institute committee, which is developing a standard to control cumulative trauma disorders.
The staff participated in monitoring corporate-wide settlement agreements on ergonomics and attended a conference in Sweden on preventing work-related musculoskeletal disorders.
Staff also made 20 speeches around the country on issues such as bloodborne pathogens and ergonomics.
The nurse intern program supported five interns.
The Office of Occupational Medicine gave medical and toxicological assistance to the field and the national office, thereby supporting health-related investigations, standards and guidelines development and assisting training and compliance activities.
Staff continues to supervise the mandatory medical examination program for all agency compliance officers and also has prepared more than 45 medical access orders to help compliance activities.
Other major efforts of the Office of Occupational Medicine included consultation and assistance during a Legionella outbreak; participation in multiple inspections in the meat-packing industry; help with inspections and evaluations of medical management programs for cumulative trauma disorders; written guidelines on evaluations of tuberculosis control plans in health care institutions; other written materials, including an update on the safe handling of hazardous drugs and exposure control as required by the bloodborne pathogens standard and writing portions of chapters on waste anesthetic gases and lead in construction for OSHA Technical Manuals and sections of the cadmium standard.
The Technical Data Center (TDC) continues to offer the most current technical information available on safety and health to OSHA staff, other government agencies and the public.
Several products, such as industry standards, formerly available only on microfilm, were purchased in the CD-ROM format for the TDC and for the OSHA regional libraries.
These new products offer storage, retrieval and cost savings.
TDC also installed a device that faxes stored documents to callers without staff handling and is incorporating it into existing procedures.
The OSHA Cincinnati Laboratory (OCL) supported OSHA's compliance activities by calibrating and repairing more than 10,000 instruments.
OCL also completed several major technical programs, including an automated pump-testing system, automated calibration of precision sound level meters and test equipment for susceptibility to external electromagnetic fields.
OSHA continues as national leader in identifying the effects of electromagnetic fields on instruments and determining ways to eliminate them.
The Directorate of Policy continued efforts to foster interagency cooperation to enhance worker safety and health protection.
OSHA and the Department of Energy developed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to clarify jurisdiction, give technical assistance, evaluate programs, exchange and train personnel.
OSHA also began discussions with the Federal Aviation Administration to establish procedures for more effective safety and health protection for airportbased airline personnel.
The directorate continued coordinating OSHA participation in international activities.
OSHA also addressed labor issues initiated under an MOU signed in 1991 by the Secretary of Labor and the Mexican Secretaria del Trabajo y Prevision Social.
In FY 1992, the directorate completed a comprehensive comparison of U.S. and Mexican occupational safety and health programs, parallel to NAFTA negotiations.
Other activities included joint site visits, industrial hygiene assistance, seminars on high-hazard industries and plant-level training.
OSHA also trained, and provided technical assistance to, parties from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.
OSHA testified at 15 Congressional hearings on subjects such as OSHA reform, Clean Air Act implementation, federal employee safety and health, needlestick injuries, criminal penalties and cooperation between the Federal Railroad Administration and OSHA on worker safety and health jurisdiction.
OSHA monitored nine other hearings related to OSHA reform.
Comprehensive regulatory impact analyses are mandated as part of the development of each major safety or health regulation.
Regulatory Impact Analysis completed evaluations covering two final rules — bloodborne pathogens and process safety management.
The office also completed preliminary regulatory impact analyses for two proposed rules: methylene chloride and PELs for airborne contaminants in construction, maritime and agricultural industries.
In FY 92 the Office of Construction and Engineering continued to offer safety knowledge and guidance as a complement to OSHA's enforcement actions.
The office conducted many accident investigations and developed reports documenting the causes.
OSHA investigated the cause of construction fatalities at two major construction projects - the New Denver Airport and the Boston Harbor tunnel project.
Also investigated were several crane accidents, a bridge falsework failure, a shoring system failure and structural steel framing system failures.
The accident investigation reports are used in connection with enforcement actions.
The Office of Construction and Engineering also distributed the reports to the construction industry to call attention to the safety issues involved and mitigate recurrence.
Office staff served as expert witnesses in connection with several enforcement actions and testified before grand juries in two criminal cases.
The office studied 360,000 construction accidents in 10 states using data collected from the workers' compensation insurance program.
It examined the influence of factors such as geography, industry groups, worker experience and the construction trades on accident statistics.
The office distributed several thousand copies of the report in response to requests from the construction industry.
Using data from construction projects conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the office conducted an additional study which, when compared with general, private sector construction, highlighted the differences between the Corps' exemplary safety record and that of the private sector.
Anticipating OSHA rulemaking activities dealing with steel erection, the office did an in-depth study of the causes of ironworker fatalities.
The office continued its outreach efforts with the private sector to improve construction safety.
This included working with professional organizations, trade associations, business groups, labor and universities.
Staff taught OSHA construction safety and health courses to construction personnel at eight locations nationwide with special emphasis on small businesses and minority firms.
This included safety training for minority contractors in cooperation with local government, a university, and the National Association of Minority Contractors (NAMC).
The office also worked with the NAMC to establish a construction safety committee and develop a safety program for its membership.
The Office also performed special studies, including analyzing the factors affecting construction accidents, and continued to work with the private sector to promote construction safety.
In fiscal year (FY) 1992 the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) contributed to the nation's effort to develop a well-trained, educated, productive workforce.
The accomplishment is notable because severe budget constraints required careful, conservative management of resources.
The Wage and Hour Division's (WHD) enforcement of all labor standards included a public information program on requirements of the law.
Other activities included: a national child labor strike-force initiative aimed at employers in smaller metropolitan areas; farm labor investigations under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act; a compliance strike force effort in the garment industry; publication and implementation of deregulatory efforts and continued training for all ETA employees in total quality management concepts.
The WHD negotiated a U.S.- Mexico child labor study in conjunction with the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) integrated minorities and women, veterans and disabled workers into the nation's workforce by enforcing nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunity statutes, with emphasis on apprenticeship programs and large construction projects.
The OFCCP's annual awards program to publicly recognize federal contractors for efforts beyond the requirements of the law drew great support among employers, special interest and industry groups.
Enforcement Initiatives.
In FY 1992, WHD improved its enforcement programs and directed investigations in all of its labor-standards responsibilities.
Findings in FY 1992 were $224,681,508, an increase of $36,725,693, or 19.5 percent over FY 1991.
Fair Labor Standards Enforcement.
Wage and Hour conducted 60,457 compliance actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and acted on 47,344 complaints alleging violations of minimum wage and overtime provisions.
More than $177.7 million in unpaid back wages were owed to 418,047 workers.
Employers agreed to pay $136.3 million in back wages to 382,132 workers.
A settlement was made on the pending civil litigation against five garment manufacturers, an associated administrative and accounting firm and their owners in Saipan.
The companies and owners will pay $9 million in back wages and other compensatory, liquidated and punitive damages to more than 1,200 employees for past wage violations.
Payment will be administered by the Wage and Hour Division.
The settlement is a result of investigations, begun in 1990 by Wage and Hour's San Francisco regional office, of six companies.
Investigators found workers, recruited primarily from China, worked up to 84 hours per week, did not receive overtime pay as required by law and were paid far below the Saipan minimum wage rate of $2.15 per hour.
The owner of one of the nation's largest growers of ornamental flowers pled guilty in federal court to charges including racketeering, conspiracy, harboring undocumented workers, failure to pay minimum wages and overtime compensation and making workers buy services and goods solely from the defendants.
The firm agreed to pay $1.4 million in back wages to more than 380 employees and ex-employees, illegally recruited in Mexico.
The owner also pled guilty to eight felony and eight misdemeanor charges brought by the U.S. Attorney's office in coordination with the Wage and Hour Division, the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Child Labor Law Enforcement.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted its FY 1992 child-labor-law enforcement strategy through education, outreach and compliance assistance to apprise employers, youths, parents and educators of the child-labor-law requirements.
The Division's regional offices also enforced child labor laws.
It has been an efficient use of investigators.
The Division, with its regional and district offices, conducted another national strike force initiative in 1992, concentrating on firms in cities with less than 25,000 people — areas most likely to employ youth in violation of child labor laws.
In FY 1992, Wage and Hour conducted 33,814 investigations of compliance with child labor requirements; 19,443 minors were found illegally employed.
Assessed were $14,424,785 in child labor civil money penalties; $8,009,458 were collected.
The Wage and Hour Division drafted the U.S.-Mexico child labor report which describes the laws and regulations for the employment of children 12 to 18 in both countries, the general level of participation of children in each nation's labor force and the policies and practices used to enforce child labor laws.
Government Contracts Labor Standards Enforcement.
In FY 1992, Wage and Hour resolved 3,156 government contracts compliance actions, including 2,585 complaints alleging violations, to enforce prevailing wage requirements of the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act (SCA) and other labor standards statutes.
Findings showed nearly $47 million in back wages owed to 47,664 workers.
Employers agreed to pay $39.7 million in back wages for 44,571 workers.
The SCA program issued three all-agency memoranda for a final ruling on contingency clauses in collective bargaining agreements, publication of the third edition of the "Service Contract Act Directory of Occupations" and the prevailing health and welfare benefit levels to be paid workers under federal service contracts.
The Wage and Hour Division implemented revised Davis-Bacon Act regulations permitting expanded use of helpers on federal and federally assisted construction contracts.
WHD issued all-agency memoranda and gave technical assistance and training information to federal procurement agencies, unions and contractor associations.
Farm Labor Enforcement.
As a component of its farm labor enforcement strategy for FY 1992, WHD conducted regional farm labor strike forces.
WHD investigated 2,957 cases under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, 1,186 migrant housing inspections, 320 investigations under the temporary nonimmigrant agricultural worker program and 1,008 reportable worker investigations.
Florida Department of Labor and Employment Security/U.S. DOL.
WHD and the Florida Department of Labor and Employment Security signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on March 19, 1992 to improve administration of state and federal laws affecting agricultural workers in Florida.
The MOU calls for: joint investigations when appropriate; exchanging information and seeking the cooperation of other federal, state and local agencies; sharing evidence for civil or criminal enforcement actions brought by each of the parties; developing and distributing materials on the rights and responsibilities of agricultural workers, employers and other parties and making presentations to employer and employee groups to inform them of their rights and responsibilities.
The MOU is an outgrowth of visits to south Florida by the Secretary of Labor and the Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards after an October 18, 1991 van accident that killed seven Guatemalan farm workers.
Enhançed Criminal Enforcement.
Progress also was made by WHD in implementing recommendations of the Secretary's enforcement task force and the Office of the Inspector General to improve criminal enforcement of its compliance program by prosecuting to deter violations and encourage compliance.
The criminal enforcement task force revised existing Wage and Hour enforcement policies and procedures.
Criminal enforcement training was delivered at the advanced investigator training course and seven Wage and Hour employees, including six designated regional criminal enforcement coordinators, were trained at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center in Glynco, GA.
Enforcement Initiative in the Garment Industry.
In FY 1992, WHD initiated national, coordinated enforcement in the garment industry to enforce compliance with the minimum wage, overtime, homework and child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The range of enforcement remedies available to the Department was used, including "hot good" actions.
New techniques involved apparel manufacturers to help bring their contractors and subcontractors into compliance.
This is an opportunity for a breakthrough in increasing industry compliance.
Regulatory Initiatives.
Final regulations were published to implement a provision in the 1989 FLSA Amendments permitting employers to give up to 10 hours per week of remedial education to certain employees under specified conditions precluding payment for overtime.
On November 20, 1991, final regulations revised three nonagricultural hazardous occupations orders applicable to minors under 18.
A waiver provision was eliminated that formerly allowed minors to drive school buses under certain conditions and clarified prohibitions on the employment of minors in jobs that involve the use of power-driven meat slicers and paper balers.
To comply with the 1989 FLSA Amendments, amendments to the interim regulations for the phased-in increases in the FLSA minimum wage in Puerto Rico were published on January 10, 1992.
Regulatory changes allowing the expanded use of helpers on construction projects subject to the Davis-Bacon, and related, Acts became effective February 4, 1991.
Activities to implement the regulations were suspended following enactment of the Dire Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, which prohibited the Department from using funds to implement the helper regulations.
On April 21, 1992, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upheld the helper regulations, except for a two-helpers-for-three-journeymen ratio limit.
It ruled that the appropriations rider prohibiting implementation expired at the end of the previous fiscal year.
The Department removed the ratio on June 26, 1992.
The AFL-CIO Building and Construction Trades Department petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court to review the decision.
Revisions concerning truck drivers in the Davis-Bacon Act regulations were published on May 4, 1992 in response to another decision by the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals.
In Building and Construction Trades Department, AFL-CIQ v. U.S. Department of Labor Wage Appeals Board (Midway Excavators, Inc.), 932 F. 2d 985 (D.C. Cir. 1991), the court struck down a portion of the regulations that applied the act's labor standards to truck drivers employed by a construction contractor while transporting materials and supplies from independent suppliers over the open roads to covered construction sites.
The court declared this provision beyond the authority of the statute and ruled the act is limited to workers employed directly upon the site and not to truck drivers who come to the site only briefly.
An interim final rule, effective upon publication, invited comments on provisions that applied the act's labor standards to truck drivers only for their time employed directly upon the site of the work.
Time spent off-site would not be covered; however, truck drivers would still be covered while hauling between the site and any special, nearby facilities established exclusively for a covered project.
These changes would include a proposal to cover delivery truck drivers' on-site time only if it is more than incidental, with proposed alternatives for defining “incidental,"and issues related to site of work.
The Department amended the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act regulations on July 16, 1992.
The amendment gave an alternative regular dealer definition for information systems integrators, firms that contract to provide operational information processing systems to the federal government.
Several revisions were published in the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act regulations in FY 1992, including amendments to increase levels of vehicle liability insurance coverage to conform to levels required by the Interstate Commerce Commission; amendments to decentralize procedures for requesting an administrative hearing on notices of determinations issued by the Department assessing civil money penalties and revoking or denying a Farm Labor Contractor Certificate of Registration.
Another amendment updated the toll-free telephone listing for information from the central public registry of persons issued a Certificate of Registration or a Farm Labor Contractor Employee Certificate.
The new immigration programs that Wage and Hour enforces under the Immigration Act of 1990 involve: foreign students (F-1 visas), offcampus workers employed in specialty occupations (H-1B visas) and foreign crew members (D-visas) doing dock and harbor work.
In FY 1992, Wage and Hour and the Employment and Training Administration published interim final rules for the H-1B and foreign students programs and a final regulation for the foreign crewmember and longshore program.
On August 19, 1992, final regulations were published relating to exemption from the FLSA's minimum wage and overtime compensation requirements for executive, administrative and professional employees in the public sector.
The regulations require that the salary basis component of exemption tests for public employees is not to be defeated when the employees are paid according to a pay system that requires the use of paid leave and absent accrued leave and that their pay be reduced for personal absences of less than one work day.
This rule also assures that the salary-basis test element will not be defeated by deductions from an employee's salary due to budget-required furloughs except in the work week in which the deduction occurs.
The Administration sought Congressional authority to issue regulations to give retroactive eligibility for claiming the exemption for public and private employees paid under a system that deducts for absences of less than a day.
The Davis-Bacon Reform Bill was forwarded to Congress to raise the coverage threshold from $2,000 to $250,000.
The bill would prohibit contract splitting to avoid coverage and relieves contractors of the need to submit weekly certified payrolls to the contracting agency.
The use of the training-wage provision in the 1989 FLSA amendments was studied.
Summary enforcement statistical data are being submitted monthly by the field, and investigators completed a questionnaire regarding all FLSA investigations over a period of several weeks.
The study will enable the Secretary to report to the Congress in March 1993, as required.
Quality Management Program.
In FY 1992, Wage and Hour trained all its employees in "Total Quality Management" concepts, principles and skills.
Objectives were to use quality management techniques to improve work effectiveness, enforcement and service by developing understanding concepts of the Wage and Hour Quality Model.
Wage and Hour operational planning and evaluation mechanisms and field managers' performance standards were substantially revised to reflect total quality management principles and practices.
Performance will be measured by quality, timeliness and effectiveness in serving the agency's many customers.
To learn if customer needs are being met, Wage and Hour is developing a survey to measure customer satisfaction and expectations.
A climate survey was conducted in all Wage and Hour offices to assess employee perception of the quality environment.
Results will be published in the employee Quality Newsletter.
The Wage and Hour Division finished a three-year effort to establish new performance standards for investigators, to be effective in May 1993.
They will replace current numbers-oriented standards.
Requirements-Based Budgeting/Unit Costs Resourcing.
Wage and Hour used requirements-based budgeting and unit-cost resourcing in its FY 1994 budget proposals.
Principal functions and work products were examined to identify activities critical to the mission and achievement of goals.
These techniques will help determine the cost-effectiveness of program operations and reexamination of program policy and budget decision-making.
OPM Grade Level Guide for Compliance Work.
The Wage and Hour Division implemented the OPM Grade Level Guide for Compliance Work and the GS-12 Workload Analysis.
This was an eight-year effort to develop new classification standards for the Wage and Hour Compliance Series, GS-249.
It resolved a long-standing issue regarding the appropriate and supportable number of GS-12 investigator positions in district offices.
It included development of a system of self-audits/workload studies in district offices using the classification criteria in the OPM Compliance Guide.
It was the first time such an approach had been used to implement OPM standards.
Dept. of Justice's Immigration and Naturalization Service/DOL.
In 1992 a memorandum of understanding (MOU) was signed with the Department of Justice's Immigration and Naturalization Service calling for closer coordination in enforcing the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA).
The MOU authorizes Wage and Hour and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) staffs to warn employers found in apparent violation of the employment eligibility verification requirement under the INA employer sanctions provisions.
It calls for cross-training of enforcement staff and streamlined referral and information sharing.
Department of Education/DOL Guidelines.
The Departments of Education and Labor collaborated on guidelines distinguishing trainees from employees in applying the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act in certain programs serving the disabled.
They provide vocational evaluation or assessment, not employment, and include placement of individuals at community work sites under carefully designed and monitored individual education programs.
Decentralization and Delegation of Authority.
In FY 1992, progress was made in decentralizing and redelegating authority and responsibility for enforcement-related work from national and regional offices to field offices.
This is a result of total quality management, designed to empower employees, eliminate unnecessary workload processing and improve customer service.
The OFCCP, through enforcement of affirmative action and equal employment opportunity requirements, has helped integrate minorities, women, the disabled and veterans into the American work force.
Over the years more than 250,000 federal supply and service and construction contractors have been subject to these requirements.
Even with seven percent fewer compliance officers, OFCCP completed 4,953 compliance reviews and 1,157 complaint investigations.
The reviews were at contractor facilities employing 2,150,267 workers.
OFCCP also obtained $30,938,576 in financial awards for 3,414 people.
Enforçement Results.
Where compliance officers found contractor noncompliance with any laws under OFCCP jurisdiction, they attempted to negotiate and conciliate remedies for the violations.
In FY 1992, OFCCP entered into 2,623 conciliation agreements and 1,147 letters of commitment with federal contractors that corrected violations.
OFCCP also negotiated 638 agreements in which contractors committed $30,938,576 for front pay, back pay, salary adjustments, accommodations, recruitment and training costs.
Of this, $11,567,685 was for back pay for 2,698 women, minorities, disabled people and veterans.
Included among the settlements was more than $7,832,222 for 255 individuals with disabilities.
When the negotiation and conciliation process did not succeed, OFCCP began formal enforcement proceedings and sought sanctions that could result in the removal of a contractor from eligibility to compete for federal contracts until compliance is demonstrated.
In FY 1992, OFCCP initiated 53 such recommendations, and the Solicitor of Labor filed administrative complaints against 22 federal contractors.
Two were debarred.
Compliance Assistance.
OFCCP has encouraged voluntary affirmative action among contractors.
In FY 1992, compliance officers gave 14,870 contractors 51,595 hours of compliance assistance to help them understand and comply with OFCCP regulations and the compliance review process.
OFCCP also uses liaison groups to encourage voluntary compliance.
The groups help OFCCP find ways to improve compliance and address aspects of affirmative action unique to employment situations or industries.
OFCCP advises, gives technical assistance and information.
In FY 1992, 23 new liaison groups were formed, and 1,394 agreements executed by OFCCP between employers and agencies provided worker training or referral services.
Exemplary Voluntary Efforts Awards.
For the eighth year, OFCCP continued its Exemplary Voluntary Efforts (EVE) Awards program, recognizing employers for innovative efforts beyond the requirements of the law to develop employment opportunities for minorities, women, the disabled and veterans.
Twelve employers and one liaison group received EVE Awards at the FY 1992 ceremony.
One contractor won the Secretary's Opportunity 2000 Award for comprehensive programs that consider future work-force challenges while assuring equality of opportunity and full use of human resources.
Opportunity 2000 award recipients for this year and the four previous years were exhibited for the first time.
Glass Ceiling Initiative.
In FY 1992, Pipelines for Progress, A Status Report on the Glass Ceiling was released.
Based on a second round of corporate management reviews by senior OFCCP officials, it covers: work force trends; corporate commitment and actions; follow-up on pilot studies, continuing problems and corrective actions.
A sequel to last year's Report on the Glass Ceiling Initiative, the new report continues the Department's commitment to identify and remove artificial barriers that keep minorities and women from advancing to mid- and upper-level corporate management positions.
The initiative was prompted by OFCCP's routine compliance reviews and research.
Minorities and women have made gains over the last 25 years, but few have penetrated the upper echelons of corporate America.
OFCCP's glass ceiling reviews were of Fortune 500 companies in each of the agency's ten regions.
Employers must act to eliminate artificial barriers to the advancement of qualified minorities and women.
As the only agency that can audit companies for affirmative action and non discrimination compliance, OFCCP is responsibile for ensuring that no such barriers exist.
OFCCP also helps with cooperative compliance outside the formal audit setting.
Employees must be responsible for their own career progress.
Workplace advancement often means employees must make decisions on factors such as relocating to less than ideal localities, working long hours, taking career risks, volunteering for additional assignments or moving to another division.
Joint Enforcement of 29 CFR Part 30.
Enforcement of this joint apprenticeship employment initiative of the Women's Bureau, the Employment and Training Administration and the Employment Standards Administration was implemented in FY 1992.
It will increase equal opportunity in apprenticeship programs and heighten outreach and awareness efforts.
OFCCP and The Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training reviewed 82 program sponsors.
Americans with Disabilities Act.
The ADA requires OFCCP-Department of Justice coordination with the Equal Opportunity Employment Commission (EEOC) so that there is no duplication of efforts in processing complaints and that the agencies are following the same standards.
This became effective in July 1992.
A coordinating regulation was published in FY 1992 that gave procedures for EEOC and OFCCP to use in processing allegations of employment discrimination under the ADA and Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
Since ADA regulatory requirements for Section 503 must be consistent with the ADA in interpretation and application, OFCCP rewrote its implementing regulations for the section in FY 1992.
The revisions incorporated amendments made to the statute, reorganized and clarified the affirmative action requirements and incorporated the substantive nondiscrimination requirements of the ADA.
OFCCP will publish these regulations as final rules early in FY 1993.
Federal Employees' Compensation Program.
Periodic Roll Management Project.
FECA offices to review periodic roll cases.
Two years were needed to allocate work space, acquire computer equipment, hire and train staff and develop supporting software.
The teams were intensively trained and began on June 1 to review 25,000 cases for continued disability status, reemployment potential and possible adjustment of benefits.
At present staffing levels, this project has the potential to achieve $12 million in benefit savings.
As of September 30, compensation had been adjusted or terminated in about 248 additional cases, with benefit savings of about $800,000 over the same four-month period in the previous year.
Those savings are well ahead of the amounts expected at this early stage of the project.
Assisted Reemployment.
FECA implemented a four-year Congressionally-authorized demonstration project called Assisted Reemployment.
Salary reimbursement incentives are used to encourage employers to give jobs to injured federal workers.
Incentives can be as much as 75 percent of wages the first year, 50 percent the second and 25 percent the third.
No other worker compensation system has such a program, and the results will be studied to see if the law should be amended permanently.
To date, 35 disability beneficiaries have found work through this incentive.
Claimant Advocate Project.
Case intake ended in the Claimant Advocate Project in three FECA district offices, a study designed to test whether nurses conferring with patients and physicians by telephone can improve results in low-back-injury cases.
The project was designed under an agreement between OWCP and the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health.
Unit Case Management.
A year-long study of a team approach to managing claims-examining units was finished in June 1992.
This new way of organizing and assigning work grew out of employee initiatives in the San Francisco and Jacksonville district offices.
After testing in a number of offices, this alternative to the traditional number-blockassignment approach was found to be viable, with some significant morale and training advantages.
Rulemaking.
In two regulatory actions, OWCP limited the award of lump sum payments in lieu of continuing compensation and expanded the list of body parts or organs for which schedule awards can be claimed to include female and male reproductive organs.
Following celebration of the 75th anniversary of the signing of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, OWCP published a history of the FECA program.
The history is being distributed to OWCP employees, federal agency managers, union officials, economists, academicians and others who participated in the anniversary.
Proceedings of the anniversary conference were recorded on videotape and in print.
Data System Enhancement.
In FY 1992, OWCP continued to work through its enhancement schedule for the Sequent Automated Data System.
Programming was completed for district office compensationpayment-history query capability.
Installation is expected in the first quarter, FY 1993.
A pilot study to use bar coding on case-file folders to allow staff to update folder locations through electronic scanning was completed.
The FEC program will purchase and install the scanning equipment in all offices by the end of December 1992.
FECA continued to integrate and enhance the system by testing a first-generation automated medical bill adjudication system.
It is designed to pay, pay with adjustment, or deny most routine bills based on case and provider data and will suspend more complex bills for online review and decision.
Houston and Long Beach district offices were connected to the new OWCP data system in FY 1992.
All FEC and Longshore offices are now connected.
Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Program.
Automated Procedure Manuals.
The Longshore Procedure Manual and the Longshore Case Management System User's Manual were automated in FY 1992.
Program personnel now have quick, direct access to operational procedure instructions through personal computers at their workstations.
The indexed manuals facilitate location of information, and automation gives immediate access to the latest amendments and revisions of operational procedures.
Training.
In FY 1992 the Longshore Program contracted for development of a training package in claims-examiner informal conference skills.
The conferences, a long-standing form of alternative dispute resolution, are valuable alternatives to the time-consuming formal hearing process.
Conferences reduce the number of contested issues as a case proceeds to litigation, eliminate the need for formal proceedings and save money.
Coal Mine Workers' Compensation Program.
Case Monitoring Initiatives.
In FY 1992, the Black Lung program completed its mailings to 12,000 Black Lung benefits recipients who are paid by the responsible mine operator.
The initial mailing to 34,000 beneficiaries receiving only medical benefits was also completed in 1992.
A questionnaire to learn if beneficiaries are being appropriately paid will be distributed in FY 1993.
Automated Program Directive System.
The Black Lung program also improved its on-line access to program procedures and other documents by indexing and placing its regulations on the Personal Librarian Reference System.
Key-word retrieval is now available in each office for the entire program manual, directives, regulations and other policy documents.
Successful Use of Informal Conferençes.
The Black Lung program increased the use of informal conferences as an alternative to litigating disputed cases.
In FY 1992, the program completed more than twice as many informal conferences as in the three preceding years.
Hence only 2,027 disputed Black Lung cases were accepted by the Office of Administrative Law Judges for hearing.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) continued to place special emphasis on programs to help the mining industry achieve "Zero Fatalities by the Year 2000."
This included activities in enforcement of mine safety and health rules, hazard awareness, miner training and rulemaking.
In support of the Secretary of Labor's goals, MSHA continued work in four specific areas.
Three support the goal of working toward a safer and healthier work environment - Coal Mine Respirable Dust Task Group, Small Mine Initiative and Substance Abuse in the Workplace.
The fourth supports the goal of improving the department to reflect the future needs of its workers through the National Council Of Field Labor Locals (NCFLL)/DOL Employee Involvement and Quality Improvement Initiative.
Widespread allegations of tampering with respirable coal mine dust samples by industry resulted in the issuance of approximately 5,000 citations in FY 1991.
As a result, Secretary of Labor Lynn Martin directed MSHA to review thoroughly the coal mine respirable dust program and make recommendations for improvement.
A Coal Mine Respirable Dust Task Group (Task Group) was formed consisting of representatives from MSHA, the Bureau of Mines, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
A review report of the Task Group's findings and recommendations was published in June.
Following the report's release, MSHA conducted 17 public information meetings around the country to discuss its content with industry representatives.
MSHA has planned to implement the recommendations within the next 12 to 18 months.
In addition to the work of the Task Group, litigation of dust sample tampering cases continued during the year.
Eighty-five companies and individuals pled guilty to fraud or criminal charges under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, and some were sentenced to as much as 13 months in prison.
Some 100 companies have paid the assessed penalties or entered into settlement agreements.
Other companies involved have contested their penalties.
A new tamperresistant respirable dust cassette was developed and approved to replace those now in use.
Efforts of the Small Mine Initiative continued during the fiscal year.
This initiative targets Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia to identify and assist small coal mine operators in preventing accidents and improving compliance.
MSHA has been working with state mining organizations, particularly in training.
To date, 38 mines in these states have been helped and have put accident prevention programs in place.
Assistance to another 18 mines has begun.
As part of the Small Mine Initiative, Job Safety Analysis (JSA) continued in FY 1992 as a significant agency program and was promoted in the mining industry as a proven accident prevention technique.
The former MSHA-sponsored JSA Steering Committee was converted into an industry-sponsored committee, with labor and government representatives also participating.
This group was renamed the National Mining Committee on Job Safety Analysis.
A charter for the committee was adopted, which commits to using JSA as a better way of doing business.
MSHA's efforts to promote a safer workplace through an increased awareness of substance abuse and related problems continued during FY 1992.
A cooperative involvement with the Mining Industry Committee on Substance Abuse continued with its integrated program directed at publicizing that anyone can be the victim of substance abuse.
Efforts were designed to work toward basic attitude and behavior changes by informing the mining industry and associated communities of problems related to substance abuse.
FY 1992 was one of the lowest years in the number of fatalities in the mining industry.
There were 52 fatalities in the coal mining industry compared to 56 for FY 1991.
The metal and nonmetal mining industry had 49 fatalities compared to 48 in FY 1991.
MSHA continued vigorous efforts to reduce the number of fatalities from roof fall, which still is the leading cause of death in underground coal mines.
The Roof Evaluation and Accident Prevention (REAP) program was designed to work toward the reduction of deaths.
During FY 1992, specially produced instructional materials and REAP statistics were provided to industry and state representatives, and the number of roof-fall fatalities declined.
In addition, each roof-fall fatality was reviewed and classified to determine how and why each accident occurred and what action should be taken to prevent such accidents.
The initiative to combat illegal coal mining continued through the fiscal year.
MSHA successfully prosecuted ten individuals for operating illegal coal mines, and three individuals received 5-year mandatory sentences.
Three other mine operators were prosecuted on two felony counts and one misdemeanor for conspiracy and fraud against the United States.
As a result of these actions, illegal mining in Eastern Kentucky has almost been eliminated.
MSHA plans to continue efforts to curtail illegal mining in Kentucky and expand activities into other states.
MSHA continued its special emphasis program to address metal and nonmetal mines with potential for serious injuries or fatalities due to special geological environments, special operating conditions, or possible unplanned release of hazardous chemicals.
In FY 1992, 19 mines and mills participated in the program.
MSHA also continued the program to issue non-assessable non-compliance notices to metal and nonmetal mines or mills opening for the first time.
Under this program, a citation is issued during the next regular inspection for conditions not corrected.
MSHA participated in several activities as part of the United States' effort to provide mine safety and health program assistance to the countries formerly a part of the Soviet Union or under its political control.
MSHA inspectors participated with OSHA on a trip to Poland to inspect its coal mines.
While in Poland, coal mine REAP statistics were presented to the Polish Labor Inspectorate.
MSHA's assistant secretary traveled to Kazakhstan and met with officials of the Ministry of Power Engineering, mine management, and union members to discuss a variety of mining issues.
Other MSHA employees traveled to the coal mining region of the Ukraine and to Vorkuta, Russia to provide mining technology assistance.
In FY 1992, MSHA proposed rulemaking actions concerning hazards of working in confined spaces, health hazards of diesel particulate and safety requirements of high-voltage longwall equipment.
MSHA published final rules on explosives and blasting, safety standards for refuse piles and waste impoundment dams, and underground coal mine ventilation.
A final rule also was published that revised criteria and procedures for assessing civil penalties for violations.
This rule implemented provisions of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, which increased the maximum civil penalty to $50,000.
The maximum penalty was applied to approximately 25 special-assessed violations.
About 60 violations were assessed between $10,000 and $50,000.
Assessments for violations were about $29 million for FY 1992.
Under the NCFLL/DOL sponsored Employee Involvement and Quality Improvement project, MSHA initiated a program to involve field employees in problem-solving and decision-making activities.
Unionmanagement pairs were trained, and their activities have been directed toward three objectives: (1) Improve the quality of day-to-day working life.
2) Improve organizational effectiveness at all levels.
3) Improve the quality of products and services provided.
The pairs were selected from and represent each of MSHA's field locations.
Efforts were begun with the various field working groups to promote team building and identify ways to improve internal and external customer service as part of the Department's "Serving Our Customer" emphasis.
MSHA-initiated policy resulted in the development and maintenance of mine emergency response plans for field and headquarters organizations.
Plans were developed to improve the agency's readiness to respond to any mine emergency or disaster.
The Accountability Program continued to be an important management control tool in overseeing MSHA's enforcement program.
Comprehensive reviews of MSHA performance also were made in connection with major mining accidents at the J&T Coal, Inc.
No. 1 Mine in Virginia and the Granny Rose Coal Company No. 3 Mine in Kentucky.
There were 1,810 underground coal mines and 2,522 surface coal mines and facilities under the jurisdiction of Coal Mine Safety and Health (Coal) during FY 1992.
Coal conducted 31,798 safety and health inspections and investigations, including 1,557 education and training activities at mine sites.
It issued 96,792 citations and orders to coal mine operators and independent contractors working at the mines for violations of health or safety rules.
At the request of mine operators and miners' representatives, MSHA supervisors held 2,180 health and safety conferences to discuss the results of mine inspections.
The Coal work force consisted of 1,437 employees in FY 1992, including 790 coal mine inspectors and 38 specialized enforcement and engineering staff.
Coal Mine Safety and Health managers, inspectors, technical specialists and education and training specialists operated from 10 district offices, 17 subdistrict offices and 72 field locations throughout the country.
There were 22 MSHA health and safety training specialists stationed in district and field offices to aid mining companies in their education and training programs.
Most states had a reduction in the number of mine fatalities in FY 1992; however, the number of fatalities in West Virginia increased to 20, more than any other state.
At the beginning of FY 1992, the number of West Virginia fatalities continued to lead the Nation.
MSHA created a committee to review the West Virginia fatalities and devise methods to reduce their number.
This committee included representatives from MSHA, the Office of Mine Health and Safety for West Virginia, the West Virginia Coal Operator's Association and other interested parties.
MSHA began to publish monthly the names of coal companies in West Virginia that were issued closure orders.
This was designed to bring public attention to those mines with continued safety-compliance problems.
In FY 1991, 22 miners were killed by roof falls, the leading cause of death during the year and historically, the leading cause of deaths in coal mines.
As a result, Coal vigorously promoted a program on Roof Evaluation and Accident Prevention (REAP) during FY 1992.
The mining community was presented with video tapes of three miners being interviewed following roof-fall accidents in which they were involved.
The tapes were shown to miners at mine sites before work time.
A slidetape program of 1991 roof and rib fatalities was also produced and distributed to the coal districts and several interested parties, including the Commissioners in Virginia, Pennsylvania, Kentucky and West Virginia.
The number of roof fall fatalities fell to 10 in FY 1992.
REAP statistics were presented to numerous industry, MSHA and state representatives; West Virginia's Office of Mine Health and Safety; the Kentucky Commissioner of Mines and staff; Commissioners for Virginia and Pennsylvania and the Bureau of Mines.
All roof-fall fatalities were reviewed and classified to determine how and why each accident occurred and what action should be taken to prevent its recurrence.
On May 15, 1992, MSHA published the final rule revising existing safety standards for coal mine ventilation, with a scheduled effective date of November 15.
These standards apply to all underground coal mines and are a comprehensive revision of the original standards promulgated over 22 years ago.
The rule addressed new technology and mining systems, such as longwall.
MSHA held 18 public meetings at different locations throughout the coal fields to introduce the new rule to the mining community.
MSHA reevaluated its coal mine enforcement strategy and concluded that its primary focus should be on basic inspection activities.
This strategy emphasized that annual inspections mandated in Section 103(a), along with the additional inspections required under Section 103(i) of the Federal Mine Safety Act of 1977, constituted MSHA's core business and highest priority.
Elimination of overlapping programs strenghtened efforts to achieve improved compliance at all mines.
A small-mine initiative was developed to help mine operators prevent accidents and improve compliance at small coal mines in West Virginia, Kentucky, Virginia and Pennsylvania.
A variety of tools and approaches has been used to improve compliance and safety at these mines.
This initiative was incorporated into the Secretary's goals and objectives.
At the request of the Polish Labor Inspectorate, Coal employees served as members of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration team to inspect Polish coal mines.
While in Poland they presented REAP statistics to the Polish Labor Inspectorate.
The Coal Mine Respirable Dust Task Group concluded its year-long review of MSHA's respirable dust-control program and issued a comprehensive report of its findings and recommendations.
The report provided a description of the design and operational features of the program, a thorough analysis of its critical aspects and its shortcomings.
MSHA believes the report has given a realistic and achievable blueprint for improving the existing program and providing reasonable assurance that all miners are protected from overexposure.
MSHA plans to implement the group's recommendations within the next 12 to 18 months.
Most recommendations can be addressed through changes in existing policies or procedures.
MSHA also conducted 17 public information meetings around the country to discuss the contents of the report.
In addition, the agency finalized the design and testing of a tamper-resistant dust cassette.
The new cassette should be commercially available early in FY 1993.
In FY 1992, there were 55 special investigation cases resulting in criminal pleas or convictions involving 73 individuals and 41 companies.
There are two categories for these criminal prosecutions: fraudulent respirable dust sampling activities and violations of mandatory safety standards.
Forty eight individuals and 36 companies entered guilty pleas in the area of respirable dust sampling fraud.
Nine investigations stemming from violations of mandatory safety standards resulted in criminal prosecution and pleas or convictions of five companies and 25 individuals.
Four of the nine cases involved mine fatalities, three involved numerous willful safety violations and two were for illegal mining activities.
One hundred twenty eight corporate agents were assessed individual civil penalties for knowingly authorizing, ordering or carrying out violations of mandatory health and safety standards.
This resulted from 73 investigations.
There were 173 complaints of discrimination filed in FY 1992; 53 were referred to the Office of the Solicitor and 13 were filed with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission.
Twenty-three cases were withdrawn by the complainant, including 13 withdrawn after the complainant received a settlement from the respondent company.
The Office of Special Enforcement (OSE) in Tazewell, TN assisted in prosecuting 10 individuals for operating illegal coal mines.
Three have received 5-year mandatory sentences.
OSE also helped prosecute three recalcitrant mine operators on two felony counts and one misdemeanor for conspiracy and fraud against the United States.
OSE has virtually eliminated illegal mining in Eastern Kentucky and plans to continue its efforts in other states.
Coal Mine Safety and Health's accountability activities for FY 1992 included reviews of 54 offices by district personnel and eight district and/or field offices by headquarters personnel.
The headquarters offices were reviewed by teams of Coal National Office staff and others outside of Coal's organization.
These reviews improved several enforcement and administrative areas.
MSHA's Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health organization continued initiatives to promote mine safety and health at 287 underground mines and 10,720 surface mines, quarries, sand and gravel operations and mineral mills in FY 1992.
These operations produce over 72 mineral materials, including gold, silver, zinc, copper, iron, uranium, limestone, potash, sand and gravel.
At the end of FY 1992, metal and nonmetal mine inspectors operated from six districts, 47 field offices and five field stations.
The metal and nonmetal work force consisted of 518 employees, of whom 353 are mine inspectors and investigators.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors conducted 17,040 complete regular inspections at operations nationwide during FY 1992.
The organization conducted another 220 investigations in response to complaints from miners or their representatives about hazards.
There were 188 accident investigations in FY 1992, including investigations of all fatal accidents.
For the fourth consecutive year, emphasis was given to auditing both mine operators' and MSHÀ's records to ensure operators accurately report their accident, injury, and employment figures to the agency and maintain proper records.
In FY 1992 2,601 audits were conducted.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors issued 53,787 non-compliance citations and orders for violations of safety and health rules in FY 1992.
The largest category of citations, about 13 percent, were for violations of MSHA's rules for the use of equipment.
At the request of mine operators and miners'representatives, supervisory mine inspectors held 659 health and safety conferences to discuss the citations and orders issued by enforcement personnel.
About 33 percent of all violations cited in FY 1992 were designated significant and substantial.
These violations are considered likely to result in reasonably serious injuries or illnesses, and they usually entail higher penalties than other violations.
As a result of the compliance orders and citations issued, metal and nonmetal mine inspectors conducted 7,522 compliance follow-up inspections to check for the correction of previously cited violations.
Petitions for modification involve proposed modifications of mandatory safety standards under section 101(c) of the Mine Act.
In FY 1992, 12 petitions were received.
During the same period, five petitions were granted, eight were denied, four were dismissed, 50 were revoked and 25 are pending investigations.
Metal and nonmetal mine inspectors and training specialists made 299 visits to mine sites to evaluate and advise on the effectiveness of training and safety programs.
Inspectors and specialists also made 564 visits to mines and mills during the fiscal year for other types of compliance activities.
MSHA investigations of discrimination complaints brought by miners increased from 42 cases in FY 1991 to 74 cases in FY 1992.
Of the investigations conducted this year, 35 were closed with no violations and seven were withdrawn.
There were 161 new cases of possible "knowing and willful" violations of safety or health rules by mine operators filed for investigation and 146 investigations were completed.
Of those completed, 40 were initiated during FY 1992.
Metal and nonmetal mine safety and health personnel were active in the field of health, particularly with standards development and enforcement support.
In standards development, metal and nonmetal industrial hygienists played important roles at public hearings held on the proposed hazard communication standard and in the development of standards on air quality, noise, diesel particulate and confined spaces.
Metal and nonmetal personnel developed a protocol for a joint study with the NIOSH on the prevalence of silicosis at silica flour operations.
The study will begin in FY 1993.
In FY 1992, MSHA inspectors took 29,597 personal samples, about 47 percent of which were for noise, 39 percent for respirable silica dust and 14 percent for other airborne contaminants.
About 20 percent of the noise samples, seven percent of the respirable silica samples and nine percent of the airborne contaminant samples exceeded permissible exposure limits.
MSHA issued 1,849 citations and 46 orders as a result of these samples.
The Metal and Nonmetal organization continued to emphasize special initiatives aimed at improving safety conditions in the mines and reducing accidents.
This activity was directed at operations that met the criteria of having the potential for serious injuries or fatalities due to special geological environment, special operating conditions or the possibility of unplanned release of hazardous chemicals.
In FY 1992, 19 mines and mills participated in the program.
The compliance assistance visits (CAVs) program continued to give mining operations special assistance in complying with safety and health standards.
As resources permitted, inspectors conducted CAVs at mine operators'requests which primarily involved mines and mills opening for the first time.
During CAVs, the inspectors issued notices (nonassessable citations) for potential violations of health and safety standards.
If the noted condition was not corrected, a citation was issued during the next regular inspection.
In FY 1992, inspectors made 213 visits and issued 1,420 non-assessable citations.
Most of these citations were issued at sand and gravel operations.
Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health continued to distribute fatalgrams to the mining industry in an effort to keep industry personnel constantly on the alert and conscious of the need for safe work practices.
Thirty six fatalgrams were distributed to mine operators in FY 1992.
In FY 1992, Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health issued program information bulletins on fatal accidents for calendar years 1978- 1991 and on lost workday accidents for calendar years 1981-1991.
The bulletins contained statistics on fatal and serious accidents and were distributed to mine operators to apprise them of the areas with the most critical need for safety awareness and planning.
Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health continued to help regional and local mine rescue associations improve team skills, increase the number of trained teams available for emergency duties and promote effective, uniform rescue procedures.
The Metal and Nonmetal National Mine-Rescue Contest had 32 underground teams comprised of 300 industry personnel competing in the biennial event.
Technical Support continued to provide enforcement assistance to the MSHA inspectorate.
In FY 1992, some 180 engineering design plans for impoundments to contain mine wastes were reviewed.
Thirteen Procedure Instruction Letters on designing and reviewing mine waste disposal dams were completed.
Technical Support personnel conducted about 500 in-mine and field investigations in FY 1992 to gauge or examine for toxic materials, harmful dust, excessive noise, poisonous gases, electrical hazards, explosives and hoisting hazards and other problems which might affect miner safety or health.
Most investigations resulted in recommendations to correct hazardous conditions that could lead to safety and health problems for miners.
More than 2,000 mining-product approval actions were processed during the fiscal year.
About 450 product audits were completed to assure the safety of mining equipment for use in mines.
MSHA technicians processed about 93,000 respirable coal dust samples.
This is a part of the agency's program to ensure that mine operators comply with dust-control standards to reduce the possibility of miners developing coal workers' pneumoconiosis (black lung).
Technical support personnel continued working with Coal Mine Safety and Health and the Department of Justice in pursuing litigation, with over 500 coal companies cited for tampering with respirable coal mine dust samples.
In June 1992, Assistant Secretary for MSHA, William J. Tattersall, released the publication: Review of the Program to Control Respirable Coal Mine Dust in the United States, which was prepared by the Respirable Dust Task Group.
The Task Group was chaired by a technicaI support professional; two other technical support professionals were members of the Task Group.
Technical Support asked the Mine Safety Appliances Company to stop production of the approved respirable dust cassette in use during FY 1992.
A production start-up of the approved, new tamper-resistant respirable dust cassette was planned for mid-November.
It has been estimated that the industry's supply of the old cassettes will be exhausted within six to nine months.
Technical support personnel designed and developed a DBase III computer system to process data from the Respirable Dust Spot Inspection Program and the Monitoring Program.
The data were used to determine dust sampling practices, correlate dust concentration production and environmental parameters, examine low-weight-gain samples, develop analysis of differences between mine operators'samples and inspector collected samples and develop analyses of education and training questionnaires.
Under the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977, MSHA must collect accident, injury and employment data from all mine operators and from independent contractors working at mine sites.
The data are used to alert the mining community to accident experience and trends.
About 140,000 accident, injury and employment reports were processed during the fiscal year.
More than 44,000 mine atmospheric samples of potentially hazardous airborne substances and gases were analyzed in MSHA Technical Support laboratories.
The samples analyzed included quartz, silica, elemental, and other, substances.
Such analyses support enforcement activities and help solve health and safety problems.
Technical support engineers continued to give enforcement assistance in testing new braking systems installed on mine hoists and elevators.
In FY 1992, Technical Support tested nine new braking systems required in Pennsylvania.
The Joint Government-Industry-Labor Task Group on Person Wearable Self Contained Self Rescuers (PW SCSR) met to identify and address specific concerns associated with the issues of wearability, training, duration, deployment of less-than-60-minute units and adequacy of storage plans.
Participation was active and productive, resulting in the establishment of three subcommittees to gather background information.
Extensive investigation into the performance of the CSE Model SR-100 self-contained self-rescuer was completed following a series of complaints of inadequate performance.
The investigation included field trials in underground coal mines, testing, laboratory man tests and inspections in cooperation with the NIOSH.
The investigation resulted in the recall of all SR-100 SCSR's (about 18,000) to correct mechanical deficiencies.
Extensive testing of the SR-100 was completed to confirm performance of the unit.
In addition, service-life plans have been approved for all self-contained and filter self-rescuers used in the mining industry.
In FY 1992, the Westinghouse Mine Emergency Operations contract was canceled.
The seismic and TV systems were transferred to the Federal Emergency Management Administration for urban search and rescue.
The remainder of the equipment was transferred to MSHA's Coal Mine Safety and Health Administration.
The Hopewell facility was scheduled for transfer to the Department of Labor.
The Assistant Secretary for MSHA was invited by Partners in Economic Reform to meet with officials of the Ministry of Power Engineering, mine management, and union members representing both the officially sanctioned mine workers'union and the newly-formed Miners Independent Trade Union of Kazakhstan.
The purpose was to promote economic reform in the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union.
The economics of mining in that region, availability of workers, safety and health issues, equipment needs and miner training were discussed.
Other participants represented the Alma-Ata and Moscow Embassies and the AFL-CIO.
The U.S. coal mining industry also was represented.
Two other MSHA employees traveled to the coal mining region in the Ukraine and a fourth team traveled to Vorkuta, Russia.
The trips were funded by the U.S. State Department.
The MSHA Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances continued the agency's ongoing regulatory review program in FY 1992.
In addition to the activities involved in the regulatory process, four final rules, one proposed rule and three advance notices of proposed rulemaking were published.
On October 11, 1991, MSHA published a final rule amending regulations for explosives and blasting in underground coal mines to allow multiface blasting under limited conditions.
The final rule revised the criteria for qualification of miners to use explosives for blasting and clarified precautions to be taken with electrical equipment in blasting areas.
On December 30, 1991, the Agency published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking concerning the hazards of working in confined spaces.
In mining operations, most fatalities associated with confined space occur in storage bins, hoppers and stockpiles.
Many of the hazards of confined-space work areas in mining are identical to those that exist in general industry, for which OSHA issued a proposed rule on June 5, 1989.
On January 1, 1992, MSHA published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on diesel particulate.
The agency does not have regulations that specifically address the potentiaI health hazards associated with the particulate exhaust from diesel-powered equipment.
The agency is assessing the data received to ascertain how best to address miners'exposure to diesel exhaust.
On January 24, 1992, a final rule was published by MSHA revising the agency's criteria and procedures for assessing civil penalties for violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977.
The final rule responded to an order from the U.S. Court of Appeals (D.C. Circuit) and implemented provisions of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 increasing all categories of penalties.
MSHA intended these changes to ensure greater overall compliance with the agency's health and safety standards.
On March 2, 1992, MSHA published a final rule on safety standards for refuse piles and waste impoundment dams at surface coal mines and surface work areas of underground coal mines.
This rulemaking addressed certification and reporting requirements for refuse piles for impoundment structures, frequency of inspections of impoundments, and the method of abandoning impoundments and impounding structures.
On May 15, 1992, MSHA published a final rule on underground coal mine ventilation which introduced new technology for the systematic monitoring of explosive methane gas and gases that may indicate a mine fire.
The final rule also addressed longwall systems, including installation and removal, and incorporated the existing escapeway standards contained in 30 CFR 75.1704.
The rule was scheduled to be effective on November 15, 1992.
On August 27, 1992, MSHA published a proposed rule to establish safety requirements for high-voltage longwall equipment used in underground coal mines.
At present, mine operators must file petitions for modification to use high-voltage cables within 150 feet of pillar workings.
The proposal still would require high-voltage equipment to comply with Part 18 requirements but addresses additional safety requirements to include trailing cables, motor and shearer cables.
The Belt Air Advisory Committee submitted its recommendations to Secretary Lynn Martin in September 1992 concerning the conditions under which air coursed through the belt entry could be safely used in underground coal mines.
The committee reviewed the conditions under which belt haulage entries could be used as intake air courses to ventilate working places, minimum velocities in conveyor belt haulageways and ventilation of escapeways.
The Belt Air Advisory Committee Report was scheduled to be available to the public in November 1992.
The agency has reopened the rulemaking on certain provisions of its final rule on safety standards for metal and nonmetal explosives published on January 18, 1991.
A notice addressing these provisions will be published.
Other regulatory topics under review during the fiscal year included: rulemaking concerning electric cables and splice kits; electric motor assembly approval; flame-resistant conveyor belts; fire fighting, escape and evacuation and safeguard criteria for hoisting and transportation.
The agency continued work on standards for air quality, diesel-powered equipment, noise, Part 48 miner training, carbon monoxide monitor approval, and hazard communication.
Educational Policy and Development (EPD) continued to develop, monitor and evaluate health and safety training programs for the mining industry.
During FY 1992, the MSHA State Grants Program disbursed $5.6 million to 46 states plus the Navajo Nation for use in developing and conducting mine health and safety education and training programs.
An estimated 145,000 miners were trained using the resources of this program.
EPD specialists completed the proposed revision of the existing Title 30 CFR Part 48.
The proposed changes essentially revised the definition of miner to include all supervisors to address the disproportionate number of injuries and fatalities involving supervisors.
The changes revised the definition of experienced miner to mean a miner who has had one year of mining experience and has completed an MSHA-approved new miner training program.
Training for experienced miners, including supervisors, was strengthened, and the changes removed or revised certain coal mine training requirements in Part 75 and 77 of 30 CFR that are already covered under Part 48.
This proposed amendment to Part 48 was open for public comment until September 24, 1992.
Public hearings were held in July 1992, and the comment review has begun.
EPD led several significant agency initiatives.
One was to promote the use of Job Safety Analysis (JSA) in the mining industry.
JSA is a proven accident prevention technique through which miners, foremen and supervisors are able to work together to identify hazards and develop procedures that serve as a blueprint for performing jobs in the safest, most efficient manner.
EPD personnel were instrumental in converting the JSA Steering Committee into an industry-sponsored committee comprised of industry, labor and government representatives and now titled the National Mining Committee on Job Safety Analysis.
JSA activities during the year included meetings with mining industry representatives and adoption of a charter for the new committee.
The committee also discussed and initiatied the development of additional informational materials and joint activities for the coming fiscal year.
In FY 1992, the Small Mines Training Initiative (SMTI), which worked in concert with the Joint MSHA/State Mine Assistance Program to reduce accidents and fatalities that occur in small coal mines, reached 76 mines in Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia, where the mining industry has consistently experienced the highest accident rates.
The SMTI trained small-mine operators and their employees on JSA, accident analysis, other accident prevention programs, reduction of repeat violations, and substance abuse.
The National Mine Health and Safety Academy (Academy) trained some 4,900 mining industry and MSHA personnel in FY 1992.
In addition, the Academy's Mine Simulation Lab facility was completed and dedicated on September 1, 1992.
During the year, EPD personnel also supported the Holmes Safety Association (HSA).
HSA is a national voluntary organization of individuals from management, labor and government dedicated to preventing fatalities and injuries in the mining industry.
HSA recognized individuals and companies for working safely in the mining industry and provided safety information to its 7,000 members through the HSA Bulletin.
EPD published 11 safety bulletins for HSA in FY 1992.
MSHA's Office of Assessments assessed civil penalties for about 175,000 violations of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act and of mandatory safety and health standards.
Penalties assessed were about $29 million, a 16 percent increase over the previous year.
The excessive history program, which increased civil penalties for violations cited at mines determined to have an excessive history of violations, affected about 4.5 percent of the violations assessed and about 5.4 percent of the mines.
Special assessments totaling about $10.7 million were proposed for approximately 10,500 violations and accounted for six percent of all violations and 33 percent of all penalties assessed.
These percentages are consistent with previous years, except FY 1991 when 4,557 citations and assessments of $6.5 milllion were issued for tampering with coal dust samples.
The number of violations assessed against mine management officials was about 550, a figure consistent with FY 1991.
On November 5, 1990, the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 became effective and amended the Mine Act to increase the maximum civil penalty from $10,000 to $50,000.
It also permitted MSHA to increase all of its penalty assessments across-the-board.
Accordingly, on January 24, 1992, MSHA published a revision to its civil penalty regulations.
During FY 1992 the maximum civil penalty of $50,000 was applied to approximately 25 special-assessed violations.
Approximately 60 additional violations were special-assessed between $10,000 and $50,000.
Penalties for violations receiving regular-formula and singlepenalty assessments were increased for all violations cited on or after March 1, 1992.
Mine operators requested hearings with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on about 16,000, or nine percent, of the violations during FY 1992, a figure consistent with the percent contested in FY 1991.
This sustained increase over previous years is attributable largely to the excessive history program and to the across-the-board increases in civil penalties.
MSHA continued its aggressive efforts to collect delinquent civil penalties for violations.
This was primarily through the use of knowledgeable MSHA collections staff at headquarters and key mining areas and emphasis on increased personal negotiation and support for litigation, where warranted.
This effort enabled the government to collect almost $1 million in delinquent penalties in FY 1992.
The agency also considered and negotiated installment plans for certain mine operators claiming an inability to make one-time full payment of amounts owed.
About $17 million in civil penalties were collected in FY 1992.
The Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) administers the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974, which protects the pension and health benefits of an estimated 140 million people under our voluntary private-employer-sponsored employee benefit system.
In Fiscal Year (FY) 1992, PWBA oversaw management of 5.5 million private sector pension and welfare benefit plans with more than $2 trillion in assets.
In FY 1992, PWBA worked to advance several legislative initiatives to improve small business access to safe and affordable health care, improve the auditing of employee benefit plans, expand pension coverage, improve portability of benefits and simplify complex pension laws.
Enforcement highlights included recovery of more than $227 million for employee benefit plans and the assessment of more than $36 million in penalties for reporting and fiduciary violations.
A major component of PWBA's resources was devoted to an agency-wide effort to protect the benefits of participants and beneficiaries whose pensions are provided in the form of annuity contracts.
In FY 1992, PWBA succeeded in fulfilling the program's enforcement and oversight function.
The agency's civil and criminal investigations produced a record $227 million in recoveries for employee benefit plans.
Of this amount, approximately $145 million was recovered through voluntary compliance and $82 million through litigation and criminal cases.
PWBA accounted for 61 cases in which judicial actions were filed, 112 civil cases referred for litigation, and 51 individuals indicted for criminal violations of ERISA in FY 1992.
A concern in FY 1992 was safeguarding the retirement benefits of workers who received annuity contracts from insurance companies when their pension plans terminated.
Four lawsuits were filed in FY 1992, involving more than $82 million in pension assets, alleging that plan fiduciaries improperly selected and purchased group annuity contracts.
The department and PWBA continue to aggressively enforce multiple employer welfare arrangements (MEWAs).
The department filed four civil actions in FY 1992 against fiduciaries of MEWAs and related programs, seeking injunctions and monetary restitution for participants.
Two investigations filed the previous fiscal year were settled in FY 1992.
PWBA's regulatory efforts continue to place a high priority on providing expedited review of opinion requests from state insurance commissioners, preparing technical assistance materials and working with states in issuing bulletins to insurance agents to alert them to the illegalities associated with marketing unauthorized insurance products.
PWBA continued to stress its criminal enforcement responsibilities through investigations with other federal agencies in FY 1992, resulting in 51 indictments returned against individuals engaging in criminal violations related to employee benefit plans and MEWAs.
PWBA also developed an enhanced criminal training course for its investigators.
PWBA is actively involved in investigations of health care and insurance fraud schemes, which have been designated as top priorities by the attorney general's Economic Crime Council.
In FY 1992, PWBA advanced its legislative initiatives to provide greater retirement security for workers, expand coverage of American workers under employer-sponsored retirement plans, improve portability of benefits and simplify complex pension laws.
These initiatives, which were announced by Secretary Martin and adopted as part of the President's domestic program, are known as the Pension Opportunities for Workers' Expanded Retirement (POWER) proposal.
The President signed into law one component of the POWER proposal that expands the types of pension distributions eligible for taxfree rollovers and allows employees who change jobs directly to transfer their retirement savings to an individual retirement account or another employer's pension plan that accepts such transfers (Public Law No. 102-318).
Economic Growth Acceleration Act of 1992.
They were vetoed by the President.
PWBA's legislative initiative, the "Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangements Enforcement Improvements Act of 1992," was introduced in Congress in FY 1992.
The bill was designed to enhance the soundness and stability of MEWAs and to strengthen the ability of both the federal government and the states to ensure that these arrangements are free from fraud and abuse.
The bill, which was not enacted by Congress, would have clarified federal and state regulatory authority over MEWAs and augmented the tools available to regulators.
PWBA's legislative initiative to improve audits of employee benefit plans was also introduced in Congress in FY 1992.
The bill, which was not enacted, would have eliminated limited scope audits, required peer reviews for plan auditors, established reporting of certain crimes and accelerated reporting of auditing terminations.
PWBA also helped develop legislation to implement the President's comprehensive proposal to reform America's health care system.
Components of the administration's legislation would increase the availability, portability and affordability of employment-based health insurance, especially for small employers, their employees and dependents.
Small market reform legislation would: increase the number of health insurance plans offered to small employers; guarantee employees' eligibility for such plans; require insurers offering small employer plans to participate in risk pools; prohibit discriminatory practices by any provider of employment-based health insurance; limit exclusions of preexisting conditions and eliminate costly state benefit mandates and laws that discourage managed care.
This legislation also would encourage small employers to buy insurance through health insurance networks, which would lower administrative costs.
Other components would provide a full, permanent deduction for health insurance costs of selfemployed individuals, improve access to medical and health insurance information, control the rising costs of health care and improve the quality of medical care.
These proposals were not enacted by Congress.
PWBA also helped develop legislation to help fund coal miners' retiree health benefits, enacted as part of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, and legislation to improve and clarify the rights of reemployed veterans to pension benefits, which was not enacted.
Assistant Secretary for Pension and Welfare Benefits David George Ball testified to Congressional committees February 5 and July 28, 1992 on the enforcement of ERISA and, on June 16, on multiple employer welfare arrangements.
He also submitted a statement for the record on S. 3180, a health care reform bill, for a hearing held September 9, 1992.
PWBA continues to work with the Administration and Congress toward improvements in these laws.
PWBA's FY 1992 regulatory activities included review of public comments on advance notices of proposed PWBA rulemaking and, for the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), on whether regulations in addition to ERISA's fiduciary standards are needed to ensure that participants or beneficiaries covered by annuities receive their promised pension benefits.
To address the related problems caused by the state regulators'seizures of several insurance companies, PWBA expedited processing requests for administrative exemptions to plans holding guaranteed investment contracts.
Under the regulatory moratorium announced by the President in FY 1992, PWBA reviewed its regulations to ensure that they do not impose unnecessary burdens on the public.
Pursuant to the review, PWBA worked to finalize a regulation under ERISA section 404(c) to give employees greater control over the investment of their retirement savings in individual account plans and to relieve plan fiduciaries from liability for employees' investment decisions.
This regulation will reduce burdens placed on plan sponsors by ERISA and help stimulate economic growth.
PWBA also reviewed its plan assets regulation to determine whether it is possible to provide some relief from ERISA's trust and reporting and disclosure requirements for sponsors of contributory welfare plans.
In FY 1992 PWBA continued to research and improve the understanding of the employment-based health benefits system, through which two-thirds of non-elderly Americans now obtain their health insurance.
This research includes analysis of the anticipated costs and consequences of major health care reform proposals.
A principal part of the program was the analysis of so-called payor-play proposals by the Urban Institute under contract with PWBA.
The study, which was released by Secretary Martin in January, indicated that enactment of such a proposal would likely result in the enrollment of more than one-half of the non-elderly population in a publicly sponsored plan.
That study and fourteen others addressing topics ranging from the characteristics of the uninsured, retiree health, the effects of continuation health coverage requirements, and the costs of mandating employerprovided benefits, were published as "Health Benefits and the Workforce" in FY 1992.
PWBA also continued its series of publications providing comprehensive statistics and analysis of major developments related to employee benefits.
An updated version of "Trends in Pensions" was published in FY 1992.
PWBA's reporting compliance program, designed to assure the greatest possible compliance with ERISA's annual reporting requirements, assessed more than $25 million in civil penalties and collected more than $1.6 million in FY 1992.
A portion of this total was attributable to a project which sampled annual reports that appeared to be missing the independent accountants'reports as required by ERISA.
In March 1992 PWBA expanded the reporting compliance program and announced its intention to assess penalties against plan administrators who failed to file or did not file timely annual reports.
PWBA gave plan administrators a grace period through September 1992 to file overdue annual reports without incurring the full penalties otherwise applicable to late filings.
The grace period was later extended through December 1992.
By the end of FY 1992, about $4 million in penalties were received under the grace period program for late filers and non-filers.
In FY 1992 PWBA conducted 39 on-site reviews of accountants' work papers.
PWBA referred about 60 individuals or firms to the Professional Ethics Division of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) or to state boards of accountancy for deficient professional work involving audits of employee benefit plans.
PWBA also worked with professional groups to improve plan audits by co-sponsoring a conference on accounting and auditing issues for employee benefit plans, and by working with the AICPA to revise its audit guide and to develop audit checklists and other training and practice guides for employee benefit plans.
PWBA also conducted fiduciary compliance audits of the Thrift Savings Plan as required by the Federal Employees'Retirement System Act (FERSA).
Audits by PWBA were designed to strengthen the security of an estimated $15 billion in about 1.8 million Thrift Savings Plan accounts and to enhance opportunities for greater net earnings through recommending improvements in system operations by the Thrift Savings Plan.
PWBA received more than 180,000 written and telephone inquiries from participants, beneficiaries, employers and other interested parties concerning employee benefits.
Most of the inquiries were from individuals with specific problems related to obtaining benefits.
PWBA helped employee-benefit-plan participants get some $4 million in benefits to which they were entitled.
The Task Force on Assistance to the Public completed its report on the policy and role of PWBA in assisting the general public.
The changes recommended are designed to improve PWBA's aid in its national and field offices.
The report recommended adopting a formal policy; specialized and technical training for staff; standardizing office procedures and telephone systems; making clearer written response to public inquiries; coordinating the national office and field offices through computers and adding more staff to assist the public.
The formal policy statement on public assistance was promulgated by the Assistant Secretary; other recommendations were adopted in FY 1992.
To increase public awareness of the agency's programs, PWBA issued an ERISA Semi-Annual Report on Enforcement Activities describing criminal enforcement efforts in the second half of the year; an annual ERISA Report to Congress and a booklet on multiple employer welfare arrangements.
PWBA also published a book on health benefits research and an updated handbook of pension statistics (see Research, above).
In fiscal year (FY) 1992, the Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) continued to emphasize a balanced program of enforcement of the civil and criminal provisions of the amended Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, (LMRDA), Section 1209 of the Postal Reorganization Act and the standards-of- conduct regulations implementing Section 7120 of the Civil Service Reform Act and Section 1017 of the Foreign Service Act.
OLMS also conducted educational and compliance assistance activities for union members and others to promote greater understanding of, and compliance with, the acts.
As a result of OLMS investigations, 182 indictments and other criminal actions were returned and 177 convictions and pre-trial diversion agreements were obtained in FY 1992.
Due to enforcement actions taken in FY 1992, the courts ordered restitution of $11,946,650 in embezzled funds and imposed fines of $121,503.
OLMS conducted 343 embezzlement investigations in FY 1992 involving unions throughout the country.
At the end of the fiscal year 206 criminal cases were pending at the Department of Justice or local prosecutor's offices and 310 additional cases were pending in OLMS field offices.
In civil enforcement, OLMS opened 175 election investigations based on complaints from union members alleging violations of the union-officer election provisions of the LMRDA and 23 investigations into potential violations of the LMRDA trusteeship provisions.
Sixteen of the election complaints involved international or national unions.
Civil action was taken in 24 election cases; 23 cases were settled by voluntary compliance.
OLMS also supervised 51 union officer elections.
In FY 1992 OLMS continued to conduct compliance audits of international, national and local labor unions.
Such audits are undertaken primarily to ascertain compliance with the criminal and civil provisions of the LMRDA and give compliance assistance to union officials.
OLMS audits use streamlined procedures under its Compliance Audit (CAP), Large Compliance Audit (L-CAP) and International Compliance Audit (I-CAP) Programs.
I-CAP audits were conducted in five national and international labor organizations in FY 1992.
The national and international organizations audited had combined annual receipts exceeding $162 million and represented members in more than 600 affiliated bodies.
In addition, 806 local union audits were conducted of which 114, involving local unions with annual receipts of $500,000 or more, were conducted under the L-CAP procedure.
These CAP and L-CAP audits revealed numerous civil violations and resulted in the opening of 104 embezzlement fallout cases.
Most of the recordkeeping, reporting and other civil violations discovered as a result of the audits were remedied through voluntary union compliance.
In administering the LMRDA reports program in FY 1992, OLMS received and processed more than 42,000 reports filed by unions, union officers and employees, employers, labor relations consultants and surety companies as required by the LMRDA and related laws.
OLMS opened 71 employer, consultant and union officer and employee reporting investigations and closed 97 such cases.
OLMS also continued to place emphasis on rectifying delinquent and deficient union financial reporting violations.
To fulfill its disclosure responsibilities, OLMS processed 10,479 requests for disclosure of LMRDA reports, which involved the reproduction of more than 351,000 document pages.
In FY 1992 OLMS field offices conducted various complianceassistance and liaison activities to promote voluntary compliance with statutory obligations and complement OLMS civil and criminal enforcement programs.
Compliance-assistance activities included seminars on the provisions of the LMRDA for union affiliations or for groups of union officials within particular geographical areas.
OLMS conducted 110 formal sessions of this type in FY 92.
In addition, contacts with union officials, surety companies and law enforcement agencies were continued as part of these compliance assistance and liaison efforts.
OLMS made approximately 700 of these contacts during the fiscal year.
OLMS also responded to more than 80,000 inquiries from union members and officers, Congress, the general public and others regarding provisions of the LMRDA and other issues.
In addition, OLMS distributed various pamphlets that explain LMRDA provisions and the role of OLMS in administering them.
In FY 1992 OLMS continued to emphasize staff training.
In FY 92 OLMS was assigned responsibilities under Executive Order 12800, signed by President Bush on April 13, 1992, which requires government contractors and subcontractors to post notices informing employees concerning payment of union dues or fees.
In accordance with these responsibilities, OLMS published for notice and comment a proposed rule for implementation of the Executive Order and interim procedural guidance for employers.
OLMS also published for notice and comment two proposed regulations that would amend the annual financial reports required of labor organizations.
At the end of fiscal year (FY) 1992, funding for the Bureau of Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative Programs (BLMRCP) was discontinued.
In its 8 years of existence, BLMRCP provided a wide variety of programs, technical assistance and public information to encourage labor and management to adopt less adversarial, more cooperative relationships and to create and sustain high performance workplaces.
Some of these activities may be continued under a new organization called Team 21.
In FY 1992, the Bureau made 58 technical assistance visits to help companies and unions enhance their workplace partnerships and continued to give more than 250 local resource organizations information and training materials for improved workplace productivity, competitiveness and quality.
Besides furnishing the basic tools for initiating and sustaining workplace partnerships, the Bureau emphasized raising public consciousness of the urgent need for organizations to make fundamental changes in work practices, work relationships, job design, workplace environment and organizational structure.
More than 20 train-the-trainer workshops introduced members of the delivery network to Committee Effectiveness Training: Skill Building for Labor-Management Groups, a comprehensive training manual to help team-based working groups improve their effectiveness.
The manual produced by Bureau staff, is in its second printing.
Copies are available from the U.S. Government Printing Office.
As the fiscal year ended, the Bureau produced a similar training manual, Interest-Based Negotiations, which instructs labor and management on skills and behaviors needed to negotiate on the basis of interests rather than power.
It also helps the parties develop win-win attitudes that improve the labor-management relationship.
Fifteen workshops introduced these concepts to public and private organizations.
Within the Department of Labor, BLMRCP facilitated negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement between the Department and Local 12, AFGE.
The contract has been hailed by labor and management as the basis for a new model workplace.
Similar services were given to the Office of Personnel Management and its union.
The Bureau continued to publish and distribute its award-winning newsletter, Labor Relations Today, to more than 18,000 regular readers.
Ten other publications delivered fresh information on specific issues or examples of workplace change, including Work and Family Provisions in Major Collective Bargaining Agreements, a report examining how a variety of work and family issues is covered in 452 agreements where there are 1,000 workers or more.
The Cooperative Information Clearinghouse, a computerized database of innovative public and private work initiatives, grew to more than 550 entries.
The database contains examples of companies and unions trying creative ways to develop technologies, work systems design, labor-management cooperation, ergonomics, quality products and services, health care strategies, compensation systems and joint efforts in employee assistance programs.
The Bureau conducted six workshops and conferences to support the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act and the Employee and Dislocated Worker Adjustment Act.
It designed training materials to inform committees about possible options under the two acts and equipped them with materials to help respond effectively to threatened and actual plant closings and mass layoffs.
BLMRCP staff and the Employment and Training Administration gave presentations to State Dislocated Workers Units on their roles and responsibilities in plant closings and mass layoffs.
Under the Federal Transit Act 13(c) program, the Bureau certified more than 950 projects.
The program requires mass transit projects certified by the Secretary of Labor to include fair and equitable arrangements to protect employees before the Department of Transportation grants federal assistance.
Bureau staff helped with technical assistance and mediation in difficult cases.
Staff continued responding to program inquires and issued determinations related to the Airline Rehire Program, which mandates preferential hiring for certain workers terminated or furloughed.
Beginning in FY 1993, the Bureau's statutory responsibilities will be assumed by the Department's Employment and Training Administration.
The highlight of fiscal year (FY) 1992 activities administered by the Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) was the Transition Assistance Program (TAP).
Expanded substantially were the number of operational sites and veterans served.
The reduction of America's military forces plus implementation of the agency's plans for TAP expansion contributed to the growth.
TAP was first authorized under P.L. 101-237 as a pilot program in seven states to meet the needs of active duty service members scheduled for separation by offering them job-search assistance.
In November 1990, P.L. 101-510 established TAP as a permanent program under Title 10, U.S. Code.
TAP operates as a partnership of the Departments of Defense, Veterans Affairs and Labor, with Labor designated the leader.
TAP offers a three-day workshop to military personnel within 180 days of separation, providing separating service members with information on how to conduct a successful job search, career decisionmaking, how to make a realistic evaluation of the individual's employability and current occupational and labor-market information.
Participants also learn how to obtain veterans'benefits from a variety of sources.
There is a Disabled Transition Assistance Program for service members separating with a service-connected disability.
It includes an assessment of the job-readiness of the separating disabled service member and basic TAP services.
By the end of FY 1992, TAP was operating at 178 sites in 44 states, making the program available to 97 percent of all separating service members in the continental United States.
Under the Veterans'Reemployment Rights (VRR) law, an employee who leaves a civilian job for active military duty, voluntarily or involuntarily, or who enlists in a reserve component, is entitled to return to the civilian job after discharge or release from active duty if the employee meets the statutory eligibility criteria.
VETS field staff is responsible, under the VRR program, for helping veterans by investigating facts, explaining obligations to state, local and private sector employers and seeking cooperative resolutions of complaints at the local level.
In 1991, the nation's largest call-up of reserves in recent history occurred for Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm.
Some 225, 000 reservists were called to active duty; about one-third served in the Persian Gulf Theater.
Most of those called were away from their civilian jobs from 30 days to 6 months or longer.
Since the end of the Persian Gulf conflict there has been an increase in VRR activity, mainly concerning complaints by veterans regarding reinstatement to their jobs.
Also, there was a small increase in complaints of employment discrimination.
The number of complaints decreased slightly in FY 1992, which we attribute to the public information campaign undertaken to ease the difficult transition to and from active duty.
The Department of Labor clarified the rights of reservists in radio and television interviews and issued fact sheets, press releases and other means to convey reemployment rights information to the public.
This effort included establishment of a VRR telephone information hotline (1-800-4422-VET).
The hotline was continued in FY 1992 and is an effective information and referral system for veterans and reservists.
Most employers supported their employee reservists, and many voluntarily gave extra benefits such as pay differentials between military and civilian jobs or extended health benefits for families at no cost to the employees.
Similarly, reservists kept their employers informed of their status and availability for return to work, allowing for a smooth return to the civilian work place.
The emphasis in FY 1992 continued to be, as in the last three years, to negotiate VRR cases amicably and quickly to avoid prolonged and costly litigation.
In FY 1992, VETS field staff opened 2,331 new cases, carried over 555 from FY 1991 and closed 2,592 cases.
VETS field staff closed 40 percent of VRR cases in less than 30 days and an additional 25 percent within .60 days.
Only 17 percent of the cases took over 120 days to close.
Under the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), Title IV, Part C, VETS programs address the training and employment needs of veterans with service-connected disabilities, veterans of the Vietnam era, and veterans separated from service within the past 48 months.
These programs offer special vocational services with emphasis on remedial education; classroom, on-the-job, and other training; apprenticeships; job development; referrals for support services; outreach; public information and job placement and retention.
Eighty percent of the Title IV-C funding is allocated to the states directly.
For Program Year 1991 (July 1, 1991 through June 30, 1992), $7,311,000 was made available to the states.
To make the program more efffective, the states must match the funds they recieve.
Ninety-five percent of the funds supported the programs and goals of 4742 participants.
There were 3,231 placements.
The Title IV-C program sets aside 20 percent of the funds for discretionary purposes, augmenting this pool with money declined by the states.
For PY 1991, $2,624,673 was set aside for the discretionary use of the Assistant Secretary to develop demonstration projects and conduct research, technical assistance and other specialized programs, especially those of national scope.
In FY 1992, grants were awarded to 14 cities, as authorized by Section 738 of the Stewart B. McKinney Act, to help homeless veterans find employment.
Support services and placement of participants into transitional and permanent housing were provided as necessary.
In FY 1992, state employment security agencies (SESA) from all states, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and the District of Columbia applied for grants to support the Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP) and the Local Veterans'Employment Representative (LVER) program.
The DVOP and LVER grants awarded to the SESA funded about 1,696 DVOP specialists and 1,463 LVER staff positions.
Through employment of the DVOP specialists and LVERs, the SESAs are better able to furnish priority employment and training service to veterans.
In addition to direct job referral of veterans, the DVOP/LVER staff offer job counseling, vocational guidance, labor-market information, job development assistance, job-search workshops and referral to vocational training and support services.
National outreach efforts of the DVOP staff are responsible to see that veterans needing help from federally-funded veterans' programs are identified and get such help.
Many of the DVOP specialists and LVERs directly serve and support veterans by coordinating their efforts with the Homeless Veterans' Reintegration Project, the Job Training Partnership Act, especially JTPA Title IV-C, and the Transition Assistance Program.
More veterans registered for services this program year.
About 516,000 (19.5 percent) of 2,648,000 registrants were placed in or found employment.
SESAs also registered about 1,040,000 Vietnam-era veterans, and almost 20 percent (207,700) of them were placed in or obtained employment through this assistance.
The National Veterans' Training Institute (NVTI), initiated in 1987 by the Veterans' Employment and Training Service, was authorized by P.L. 100-23 in 1988 as a permanent institution.
Operated in FY 1992 under contract to the University of Colorado at Denver, NVTI's curriculum meets the training needs of federal and state staffs involved in employment and training services for veterans.
In FY 1992, almost 2,600 participants were trained in a variety of professional skills and veterans'services courses.
Of particular interest, over 520 participants were Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs staffs who were trained in the Transition Assistance Program.
In fiscal year (FY) 1992, the Office of the Solicitor (SOL) gave legal counsel to the Secretary and other Department of Labor (Department) officials regarding activities under more than 130 federal labor laws and other activities undertaken by the Department to promote the welfare of American workers.
When appropriate, SOL vigorously pursued litigation regarding the Department's programs before Federal courts and administrative tribunals.
The Solicitor's office was involved in the litigation of a number of important cases in FY 1992.
A major victory was achieved for reservists under the Veterans Reemployment Rights Act when the Supreme Court overruled several Circuits and, in King v. St. Vincent Hospital, agreed with the Department that the length of a leave of absence for active duty does not affect reemployment rights under the act.
In a significant setback to OSHA generic rulemaking, the Eleventh Circuit in AFL-CIO v. DOL vacated the air contaminants standard, holding that OSHA failed to provide a sufficiently detailed risk assessment for each toxic substance and a sufficiently detailed feasibility assessment for each industry.
The Solicitor's Office continues to be heavily involved in litigation of about 5000 separate violations involving more than 500 coal mine operators relating to charges that they altered or tampered with respirable dust samples.
In FY 1992, SOL was also active in enforcement.
The Office entered into consent decrees that resolved several major civil rights cases.
In each case we obtained make-whole relief, including back pay and job offers, for the discrimination victims.
Back pay totals included $1.8 million in U.S. Air; $750,000 in Woodward Governor; $316,000 in Roberts Dairy; $280,000 in Cleveland Electric Illuminating; and $230,000 in University of Maryland.
In Martin v. American International Knitters Corp., et al., CA-91- 0027 (Northern Mariana Islands), the Department reached a settlement agreement in which defendants will pay nine million dollars for overtime compensation due, liquidated damages and compensatory and legal relief (punitive damages).
Legislative activity continued.
SOL gave extensive assistance to the development of the Job Training Reform Amendments of 1992, the Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act, the Job Training 2000 Act and the National Youth Apprenticeship Act.
Finally, in international trade, SOL attorneys served on three interagency committees negotiating provisions of the North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) concerning temporary entry of business people, import safeguards and dispute settlement.
The Solicitor's Office continues to be heavily involved in litigation of about 5000 violations involving more than 500 coal mine operators relating to charges that they altered or tampered with respirable dust samples.
More than 4700 cases have been filed before the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Commission).
SOL also helped Federal prosecutors obtain criminal pleas by 43 individuals and 33 companies for submitting false respirable dust samples in Triangle Research Inc., et.al.
Case Nos. 2:91-00343; 2:91-00300 through 342.
Apart from the tampered dust sample cases, 5400 other new civil cases were filed with the Commission contesting the issuance of citations or withdrawal orders or contesting the proposed civil penalty violations.
The Commission also received about 45 new discrimination cases.
SOL continued to aid Federal prosecutors in criminal matters arising out of the Mine Act.
Besides the tampered dust sample cases, five individual mine agents pled guilty to various misdemeanor and felony charges in Fire Creek Coal Co., Inc.
Case No. 1:91-00389.
A milliondollar fine was imposed against Terry Eagle Coal Co. for two violations related to a fatality.
We also continue to help prosecute persons engaged in illegal mining.
The courts of appeals issued decisions in several major Mine Act cases during the fiscal year.
In Utah Power & Light Co. v. Secretary of Labor, et al. (10th Cir. 1992), the court held that an operator can be found to have violated the mandatory safety standard pertaining to coal accumulations even when the operator complied with his own mandatory coal cleanup plan.
In Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Secretary of Labor, et al. (10th Cir. 1992), an operator claimed that the Secretary's policy on selection of miner's representatives under the Mine Act creates an impermissible conflict with provisions of the National Labor Relations Act.
The court held that the district court lacked subject matter jurisdiction.
In FY 1992, the Commission also issued decisions in a number of important cases.
In Southern Ohio Coal Co., FMSHRC No. 88-144-R, and four related cases, the Commission held that the Secretary may issue notices requiring operators to provide transportation-related safeguards without going through notice-and-comment rulemaking as long as the safeguard notices are based on specific conditions at the mine in question and adequately specify the hazard addressed and the corrective action required.
In Drummond Company, FMSHRC No.
SE 90-126, and six related cases, the Commission held that a policy letter pertaining to calculation of civil penalties that the Secretary issued without going through notice-and-comment rulemaking was invalid as it went beyond a prior mandate from the D.C. Circuit in Coal Employment Project v. Secretary of Labor, et al., 889 F. 2d 1127 (D.C. Cir. 1989).
In an important ruling under the Mine Act, the Third Circuit held that equipment used by an electrical utility to transport raw coal from the point of delivery onto its property to a coal preparation plant, where the coal is prepared for use in the company's generating units, is part of a "coal or other mine" subject to Mine Act jurisdiction.
Penn.
Électric v. FMSHRC 969 F. 2d 1501 (3d Cir. 1992).
On the other hand, in Lancashire Coal Co. v. Secretary of Labor 968F.
2d 388 (3d Cir. 1992), the same circuit held the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) lacked jurisdiction over an inactive coal preparation plant undergoing demolition.
Also under the Mine Act, the court held that MSHÀ officials acting within the scope of their employment are not within the class of persons who may be liable for discrimination against miners.
Wagner v. Martin, 947 F.2d 943 (4th Cir. 1992).
SOL also handles litigation concerning applications for temporary reinstatement of miners alleging discriminatory discharge, expedited hearings, cases involving serious mine accidents, petitions for modification of MSHA safety standards, and trial of an increased number of cases concerning the assessment of civil penalties against individual officers and agents of mine operators.
SOL helped MSHA promulgate final rules on ventilation at coal mines, coal refuse piles and impoundments, explosives at coal mines, and rules applicable to all mines for the assessment of civil penalties.
SOL also provided legal advice in the review of about 175 petitions for modification of safety standards, 60 revocations of outstanding petitions, and approximately 200 Freedom of Information Act and Privacy Act matters.
SOL continued to advise MSHA in the establishment of a Belt Air Advisory Committee and helped MSHA complete a special report on coal respirable dust.
More than 6,000 litigation matters regarding the black lung program were referred to SOL in the past fiscal year.
The courts of appeals and Benefits Review Board considered many other important cases and issued a number of decisions significant to the program.
Several courts grappled with the statutory and regulatory provisions permitting a claimant, whose claim has been finally denied, to re-open proceedings.
In Amax Coal Co. v. Franklin, 957 F.2d 355 (7th Cir. 1992), the court held, in basic agreement with the Department, that a claimant is not required to prove the ultimate issue of his entitlement in order to have his case reviewed.
Rather, the claimant need only show factual error or changed conditions.
Several courts also confronted the validity and scope of the Department's duplicate claim regulation.
In Hall v. Gala Enterprises, Inc., No. 91-4092 (6th Cir. 1992, unpublished), the court accepted our argument that the regulation, which allows a denied claimant to establish entitlement at any time based on a change in his condition, does not violate principles of res judicata.
In Sahara Coal Co. v. McNew, 946 F.2d 554 (7th Cir. 1991), however, the court rejected the Department's position that a claimant need simply prove entitlement to prevail and held that a claimant must also demonstrate how his condition has changed.
In The Youghiogheny & Ohio Coal Co. v. Vahalik, 970 F. 2d 161 (6th Cir. 1992), the court agreed with the Department that a coal mine operator, obligated to reimburse the government for benefits paid to one of its former employees, is not entitled to an administrative hearing on the amount of interest owed.
The court concluded that the Department's jurisdiction ends once the claimant's eligibility and the operator's liability are established; disputes over the amount of interest must be brought in district court.
A number of courts considered the standards for determining a claimant's eligibility.
In Shuff v. Cedar Coal Company, 967 F. 2d 977 (4th Cir. 1992), the court embraced the Department's view that a miner's death will be attributed to pneumoconiosis (black lung disease), if pneumoconiosis hastens death in any way.
SOL has also filed a number of briefs defending the validity of the true doubt rule, which mitigates the claimant's general burden of proof by requiring the factfinder to rule in his favor on any issue in which the evidence is in equipoise.
Decisions have not yet been received in any of these cases.
Finally, two courts have cautioned against indiscriminate use of special evidentiary rules in weighing medical evidence, overturning a denial based on misapplication of the rule that later evidence is generally more indicative of the claimant's current condition, Adkins v. Director, OWCP, 958 F.2d 49 (4th Cir. 1992), and overturning awards based on misapplication of the rule that the evidence presented by a treating physician may be entitled to more weight than that presented by a non-examining physician.
The Office of the Solicitor continued to participate actively in litigation before the Benefits Review Board during the past fiscal year, filing over 1600 briefs, motions and other substantive pleadings and participating in the oral arguments scheduled before the Board.
In its most significant decision, the Board limited the class of claimants who are entitled to benefits under the Black Lung Benefits Act.
In Beatty v. Danri Corporation and Triangle Enterprises, 16 Black Lung Rep.
MB) 1-11 (Ben. Rev. Bd. 1991), the Board agreed with the Department and held that a miner must establish that he is totally disabled solely from a respiratory or pulmonary impairment to prevail under the 20 C.F.R. Part 718 entitlement criteria.
At the Department's urging, the Board also held it lacked jurisdiction to review a supplementary order of default, issued by the Department, which assessed a penalty against a coal mine operator for failure to pay black lung benefits.
The Board reasoned that, by statute, those orders are final and therefore must be enforced in a United States district court.
Bertinotti v. Mathies Coal Company, 16 Black Lung Rep.
MB) 1-16 (Ben. Rev. Bd. 1991).
In FY 1992 the Office of the Solicitor continued to provide a wide range of legal assistance to the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) in matters arising under the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).
ŠOL attorneys gave extensive help to ETA in preparing the Job Training Reform Amendments of 1992 and the related rulemaking.
SOL also assisted with such initiatives as Job Training 2000, the New Century Workforce and a the continued implementation of the Clean Air Employment Transition Assistance program and Defense Conversion program for dislocated workers.
The Solicitor's Office assișted the United States Employment Service in its administration of the Wagner-Peyser Act.
In this connection, SOL participated in the Department's coordinated enforcement of farmworker protection laws and advised the task force preparing a fifth edition of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles.
In unemployment insurance, SOL worked closely with ETA in providing technical assistance to Congress in the drafting of legislation creating the Emergency Unemployment Compensation Program, providing extra weeks of unemployment benefits to individuals who have no rights to regular, extended or additional benefits under any state law.
Upon enactment of this legislation, SOL attorneys assisted ETA in drafting instructions to the States for implementing the legislation to assure the timely and accurate payment of benefits.
SOL also aided ETA in drafting amendments to the regulations governing the program of Unemployment Compensation for ex-servicemembers to implement statutory changes expanding the eligibility of veterans of Desert Shield/ Desert Storm.
In the first case arising under the Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act of 1991 (EUCA), a favorable decision was received from a Federal district court denying a request for emergency relief.
Davis v. Duncan, E.D. N.C. 1992).
The court gave deference to the Department's interpretation regarding the interplay between the Federal and state unemployment compensation laws and regarding the ability of individuals previously disqualified from receiving unemployment compensation to receive EUCA benefits.
The court held that, although the Department's interpretation was a broad view of the statutory language, it was a reasonable one given the Department's desire to promote a degree of uniformity among the states, so it was entitled to deference.
The Department also received a favorable decision in Air Line Pilots Association (ALPA) v. U.S. Department of Labor, (D.D.C. 1992), a case arising under the Airline Deregulation Act which challenged the Department's failure to promulgate regulations for this worker benefit program.
The court, in dismissing the suit, agreed with the Department that neither ALPA nor its members had standing to bring suit since they had suffered no injury from the failure to issue the regulations.
SOL attorneys counseled the Employment Standards Administration in the preparation of significant proposed and final regulations, including: regulations to relieve public employers from certain of the salary basis requirements for the executive, administrative and professional exemption to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA); regulations to authorize information systems integrators to qualify as regular dealers under the Walsh-Healey Act; regulations to implement FLŠA amendments providing an exemption for computer-related occupations; regulations to implement amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act relating to students, crewmembers and specialty occupations; regulations to amend and clarify various child labor hazardous orders and regulations to amend existing Davis-Bacon regulations to reflect a judicial decision that the act does not cover certain truck drivers who deliver material to or from a covered work site.
SOL attorneys rendered some 1253 legal opinions and concluded 29 regulatory projects in the labor standards area.
In litigation, SOL attorneys concluded, during fiscal year 1992, about 1900 matters that were referred by the Wage and Hour Division.
Significant appellate litigation under the FLSA included Secretary of Labor v. Burger King Corp., 955 F.2d 681 (11th Cir. 1992), in which the court reversed the dismissal of the child labor injunction action as moot, given the company's past inability to assure compliance with the child labor provisions.
In Martin v. The Refrigeration School, Inc., 968 F.2d 3 (9th Cir. 1992), the court upheld a district court's ruling that the defendant could not rely upon the FLSA's exemption for commissionpaid employees because it was not a retail establishment.
In Martin v. Malcolm Pirnie Co., 949 F.2d 611 (2nd Cir. 1991), the court held that the company's established policy of docking its employees for partial day absences denied them use of the FLSA's exemption for executive, administrative and professional employees.
In Building and Construction Trades, Dept., AFL-CIO v. Martin, 932 F.2d 985 (D.C. Cir. 1992), the court sustained, in large part, the Department's regulations permitting the increased use of helpers on projects subject to the Davis-Bacon and related acts.
The court enjoined enforcement of the regulatory provision establishing a maximum ratio of helpers to journeymen.
Perhaps of more general interest was the decision in Taylor-Callahan-Coleman Counties v. Dole, 948 F.2d 953 (5th Cir. 1992), in which the court dismissed challenges to certain Wage and Hour opinion letters that the court determined were not final agency action.
In another FLSA case, the Ninth Circuit agreed with our argument that the district court applied a less stringent test than appropriate in determining whether aprospective injunction should be dissolved.
The court of appeals nonetheless concluded that the district court did not abuse its discretion in dissolving the injunction.
Martin v. Nickles & Dimes, 959 F.2d 240 (9th Cir. 1992).
In the first administrative appeal under the FLSA's section 14(c) subminimum wage provision, the Secretary, in In the matter of Richard Michael Depp, No. 91-FLS-1 (July 10, 1992), ruled the employer had failed to establish that the wage rate paid the employee for his work in its sheltered workshop reflected the prevailing rate for such work.
In Olivio Medrano, Case No. 86-MSP-60 (May 28, 1992), the Secretary held that an individual who charged a fee for transporting farm workers to and from the fields was a farm labor contractor covered under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA), even though he may not have had a contemplation of profit in providing the transportation.
There was extensive district court litigation under the FLSA.
In Martin v. American International Knitters Corp., et al., CA-91-0027 (Northern Mariana Islands), the Department reached a settlement agreement in which defendants will pay nine million dollars for overtime compensation due, liquidated damages and compensatory and legal relief (punitive damages).
In Dole v. New York City Transit Authority, CV-89- 4284 (E.D.N.Y.), the Department reached a partial consent judgment agreement where the city will pay approximately $2,165,000 in overtime compensation due to 65 officers of the Authority's K-9 Corps.
In Ball, Ball and Brosamer, Inc. v. Martin, No. 913266 (D.D.C. 1992), the district court ruled that the Department's regulatory site-of-the-work definition under the Davis-Bacon Act was a permissible construction of the statute, and further that the contractor had contractually agreed to comply with the regulation.
SOL attorneys helped the Department of Justice obtain a guilty plea by consent judgment in a criminal prosecution of a peonage case involving hundreds of migrant workers, many of whom were undocumented, where the employer had violated the wage, record-keeping, and housing protection provisions of the MSPA.
U.S. v. Edwin Mitchell Ives, et al., Čase No.
CV-90 3932 (C. D. Cal.)
In FY 1992, SOL attorneys filed many suits under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA), defended the Secretary's determinations not to sue under the LMRDA, and assisted with negotiated settlements for remedial election of union officers under that Act.
A variety of legal services also were provided in connection with issues arising under the Civil Service Reform Act, the Veterans' Reemployment Rights Act, the Federal Transit Act, the Airline Deregulation Act, and the Redwood National Park Expansion Act.
In a significant decision decided under Veterans'Reemployment Rights Act, the Supreme Court held that the length of time for which a reservist may be called to active duty and still retain reemployment rights under the Act is not limited.
King v. St. Vincent's Hospital, 112 S. Ct. 570 (1991).
In another decision favorable to veterans, the Court of Appeals held that a veteran who withdrew his contributions to a pension plan prior to entering military service cannot be held to have waived his right to participate in the plan.
The court refused to require the veteran to be burdened by such a choice made at the time he was called into service.
Leonard v. United Airlines, No. 91-1073, (7th Cir. 1992).
The Solicitor's Office successfully defended the Department in two actions arising from the officer election provisions of the LMRDA.
The Department was found not to be arbitrary and capricious in refusing to file suit to challenge a union election in which the union had disqualified a candidate for union office for working for another union and thus failing to meet the union's rule requiring candidates to have been working at the trade.
Creese v. Dole, 776 F. Supp.
1474 (D. Col. 1991).
In another case the court found that the Department was not arbitrary and capricious in closing a case because of the complainant's failure to properly exhaust available internal union remedies.
Petersen v. Dole, 956 F.2d 1219 (D.C. Cir. 1992).
The court upheld the Secretary's conclusions regarding a union's appeal process, holding that members challenging an election of international union officers need not appeal to the union convention before filing complaints with the Department of Labor.
Dole v. United Auto Workers, No. 91-1544 (6th Cir. 1992).
In another case the court ruled that complainants had properly invoked available Teamsters Union internal remedies by mailing their election protest within 72 hours of the election and that it was unnecessary for the union actually to have received the protest within that time.
Martin v. Local 480, Teamsters, 946 F.2d 457 (6th Cir. 1991).
And in a case under the LMRDA, the court reversed that portion of the trial court's protective order restricting access to subpoenaed union minutes to Labor Department employees.
On First Amendment grounds, however, the court ruled that the district court did not abuse its discretion in requiring our investigators to review the minutes in the union's presence and to notify the union of the portions they deemed relevant.
Dole v. Service Employees Union, 950 F.2d 1456 (9th Cir. 1992).
SOL helped Operation Desert Storm veterans being denied reemployment benefits under the Veterans'Reemployment Rights Act (VRR), and an extensive amount of effort continued to be devoted to development of the proposed Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act, the draft bill to overhaul the VRR Act.
SOL also continued to provide extensive legal counsel regarding the Secretary's responsibility under section 13(c) of the Federal Transit Act (formerly the Urban Mass Transportation Act), particularly since the recent enactment of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act and the Administration's privatization policy have raised many new and complex issues.
Finally the Solicitor's Office was required to devote extensive amounts of time in reviewing and defending Department decisions on benefits issues under the Redwood National Park Expansion Act, including handling a case before the Ninth Circuit, and in providing various legal support with regard to adverse impact claims filed pursuant to the Federal Transit Act, the Rail Passenger Service Act, and the Airline Deregulation Act.
SOL attorneys furnished legal services on OSHA-related legislative initiatives, state plans, federal agency safety and health programs and intergovernmental affairs.
This office assisted OSHA officials in their appearances at nearly two dozen legislative and oversight hearings, including those related to the comprehensive OSHA reform bills introduced in the House and Senate.
SOL attorneys assisted OSHA extensively in the administration and enforcement of its penalty enhancement program, implemented through by issuing citations on a violation-by-violation basis.
SOL participated in the pre-citation review process and the formal settlement process and has succeeded in obtaining provisions for corporate-wide abatement in cases involving multi-plant employers.
Two favorable ALJ decisions were received in S.A. Healey, OSHRC Docket No. 89-1508 (awarding $388,000 in civil money penalties), and in Interstate Lead Co., OSHRC Docket Nos. 89-3296, 89-2088 (awarding $1,500,000 in such penalties).
In the federal courts of appeals, the Solicitor represented OSHA in a broad range of enforcement cases that raised significant issues of whistleblower protection, Fourth Amendment and Fifth Amendment rights, attorney work product, preemption, and enforcement policy.
The year was dominated, however, by exceptionally important rulemaking litigation.
SOL unsuccessfully petitioned for rehearing of a decision that invalidated 428 air contaminant exposure limits (the PELs Standard), arguing the court exceeded its review powers because only 23 exposure limits were challenged and the court substituted its judgment for the agency's on technical issues within the agency's expertise.
AFL-CIO v. OSHA, No. 89-7185 (11th Cir., Petition filed August 27, 1992).
SOL concluded briefing and oral argument in a multi-petitioner challenge to OSHA's bloodborne pathogens standard.
American Dental Ass'n v. Martin, No. 91-3865 (7th Cir.).
SOL asked the court to declare the remand issues resolved in the lockout/tagout standard case in which the court ordered OSHA to better explain its decision-making criteria for safety rulemaking.
UAW v. OSHA, No. 89-1559 (D.C. Cir., Motion filed July 28, 1992).
The court dismissed two petitions seeking to force OSHA to regulate passive exposure to cigarette smoke in the workplace.
Action on Smoking and Health v. Dep't Labor, No. 91-1037 (D.C. Cir. Jan. 29, 1992).
In a mandamus action to compel immediate issuance of a cadmium standard, the court gave OSHÀ 30 months rather than the one year requested for issuance of a final standard.
In re International Chemical Workers Union, 958 F.2d 1144 (D.C. Cir. 1992).
Finally, in the most recent in a line of preemption cases, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed that section 18 of the Óccupational Safety and Health (OSH) Act expressly preempts states from regulating occupational safety and health issues addressed by OSHA standards unless they submit and obtain approval for a state plan, and that such preemption extends to a dual purpose state standard that has a direct, substantial and specific effect on workplace safety.
Gade v. National Solid Wastes Management Ass'n, 112 S. Ct. 2374 (1992).
In general trial litigation under the OSH Act, SOL received about 10,000 litigation matters and concluded 8,000.
With respect to litigation before the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission, oral argument was presented in two significant cases which have not yet been decided: Simpson, Gumpertz and Heger, Inc., (OSHRC Docket No. 89- 1300) (regarding the citation of an off-site consulting engineer), and Johnson Controls, Inc., (OSHRC Docket No. 89-2614) (regarding the recording of an employee's elevated blood lead level, not accompanied by overt symptoms).
Several adverse Commission decisions were issued, including: the existence of a good faith exception to the exclusionary rule in Commission cases involving the Fourth Amendment, Sanders Lead Co., (OSHRC Docket No. 87-260); the unreasonableness of an OSHA interpretation that its personal protective equipment standard requires a coke oven employer to bear the cost of protective gloves, Erie Coke Corp., (OSHRC Docket No. 88-611); and American Cyanamid Co., (OSHRC Docket No. 86-681), in which the Commission held that OSHA's effort to require the inclusion on chemical labels of the chemical's effect on certain organs was contrary to the plain intent of the Hazard Communication Standard.
The Office of the Solicitor helped OSHA extensively in standards development and promulgation, including participation in rulemaking hearings, drafting and review of Federal Register documents, and analysis of rulemaking records.
Final rules were published during FY 1992 on bloodborne pathogens, process safety management, formaldehyde, cadmium, methylenedianiline, and tremolite.
Proposals or pre-proposal Federal Register documents were published on ergonomics; crane safety; permissible exposure limit (PEL) updates for construction, maritime, agriculture and indoor air quality.
SOL attorneys also have been participating in ongoing rulemaking activities for various safety and health standards.
In FY 1992, SOL supplied legal advice and litigation support services to the Office of Workers'Compensation Programs in connection with its administration of the Longshore and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act, and the Federal Employees'Compensation Act (FECA).
In FY 1992 SOL attorneys were very active in supporting the Department in longshore matters.
In Southwest Marine, Inc. v. Gizoni, 112 S.Ct.
486 (1991), the Supreme Court, agreeing with the Department's position, held that a maritime worker whose occupation is enumerated in section 2(3) of the Longshore Act is not necessarily limited to the remedy provided by that Act, but may nonetheless be a seaman entitled to seek relief under the Jones Act.
More recently, the Court ruled in Estate of Cowart v. Nicklos Drilling Co., 112 S.Ct.
2589 (1992), that a claimant who settles a third-party claim without obtaining the employer's written approval forfeits his or her right to compensation, even though the employer is neither paying compensation nor acknowledging liability under the Longshore Act.
According to the Fourth Circuit, however, no forfeiture would occur where the employer is a party to the third-party settlement.
I.T.O. Corp. v. Sellman, 954 F.2d 239 (4th Cir. 1992), modified on reh'g, 967 F. 2d 971 (1992) (pet. for further reh'g pending).
The same court also held that where the injured worker and his or her family receive an unallocated joint recovery from the third party, the employer, not the claimant, bears the burden of establishing the amount allocable to the worker and hence available as a setoff.
The Department's position that benefits received under a state workers'compensation program must be credited against any benefits due under the Longshore Act was sustained in Bouchard v. General Dynamics Corp., 963 F.2d 541 (2d Cir. 1992).
The court, in Director, OWCP v. Luccitelli, 964 F.2d 1303 (2d Cir. 1992), held that, to obtain relief under section 8(f), an employer must show that the claimant's second injury alone would not have caused as much permanent disability as actually resulted.
In so ruling, the court rejected the standard adopted by the Benefits Review Board which allows employers to "show merely that a claimant had a pre-existing disability and then suffered a second injury."
And in Cajun Tubing Testors, Inc. v. Hargrave, 951 F.2d 72 (5th Cir. 1992), the court held that an employer must file its section 8(f) application with the OWCP district director whenever it has reason to believe the claimant has suffered a permanent disability.
The mere fact that the employer does not dispute permanency does not relieve it of the obligation to comply with section 8(f)(3).
Accord, Bath Iron Works v. Director, OWCP, 950 F. 2d 56 (1st Cir. 1991) (employer must file application whenever it could have "reasonably anticipated the probable liability of the special fund").
The courts also agreed, as argued by SOL attorneys, that Congress, in enacting the Longshore Act, did not permit employers to sue claimants to recover alleged overpayments of compensation.
Stevedoring Services of America, Inc. v. Eggert, 953 F. 2d 552 (9th Cir. 1992); Ceres Gulf v. Cooper, 957 F. 2d 1199 (5th Cir. 1992).
In a case potentially affecting many Departmental programs, SOL successfully urged the Court to uphold retroactive workers'compensation legislation that was rationally related to legitimate state objectives.
General Motors Corp. v. Romein, 112 S. Ct. 1105 (1992).
SOL attorneys provided the Office of Workers'Compensation Programs with legal support in the preparation and promulgation of two significant regulatory initiatives under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA).
The first rule, published April 27, 1992 (57 FR 15226), added the female reproductive organs to the list of organs for which a schedule award may be available under the FECA.
The second rule, published August 11, 1992 (57 FR 35752), set forth the Secretary's determination that lump sum payments of compensation will only be made in cases involving schedule awards.
More than 3,500 litigation matters involving the FECA were referred to SOL during fiscal year 1992.
In Woodruff v. U.S. Dept. of Labor, 954 F.2d 634, reh.
961 F.2d 224 (11th Cir. 1992), the court held that since "Congress has conferred on the Secretary absolute authority to enforce and administer FECA," it lacked authority to either review or reverse a decision awarding benefits under that Act.
The court also held, in Bruni v. United States, 964 F.2d 76 (1st Cir. 1992), that a civil action filed under the Federal Tort Claims Act must be dismissed when there is a substantial question as to whether the injury is covered by the FECA.
In another case, Davidson Law Firm, LTD., et al. v. U.S. Department of Labor, No.
LR-C-91-626 (E.D. Ark. July 27, 1992), the court held, as SOL argued, that the government is not required to pay a portion of the costs incurred by an injured Federal worker who files a third-party action as required by 5 U.S.C. 8131-8132.
In FY 1992 we recovered over $3.5 million as a result of such third-party actions; in addition, a credit of more than $7.6 million was established against the future liability of the government under the FECA.
And, in In Re Billie Clem Ray, Case No. 88-00547 (Bkrtcy. D.C. 1992), the court held that the claimant's wrongful conduct in failing to disclose earnings as required by section 8106(b)(2), entitled the government to a constructive trust over, and thus the right to recover, approximately $110,000 which he improperly received under the FECA.
Enforcement activity on behalf of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) constituted the major part of litigation for the civil rights program during the fiscal year.
Nationwide, twenty one enforcement cases were filed.
Fifteen of these were filed under Executive Order 11246, and six under section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act.
Twenty-four cases were resolved by consent decree during the fiscal year, including settlements in several extremely significant Executive Order pattern—or-practice cases.
For example, in OFCCP v. USAir, 88- OFC-17, SOL obtained $1.8 million in back pay and job offers for seven pilots and twenty five flight attendants.
In OFCCP v. Woodward Governor, 89-OFC-12, the company agreed to pay $750,000 in back pay and to conduct a validation study of its performance appraisal system in conformity with OFCCP regulations.
Similarly, in OFCCP v. Roberts Dairy, 89-OFC-38, SOL obtained more than $316,000 in back pay and job offers with retroactive union seniority for sixty three women.
In OFCCP v. Cleveland Electric Illuminating, 89-OFC-13, the company agreed to pay $280,000 in back pay and offer jobs to 15 people.
Finally, in OFCCP v. University of Maryland, 90-OFC-21, SOL obtained $230,000 in back pay and job offers for sixty clericals.
The USAir and Roberts cases are noteworthy because they involved awards of retroactive seniority.
In USAir the pilots' union, an intervenor in the suit, refused to sign a consent decree and, in a case of first impression, challenged OFCCP's authority to obtain retroactive seniority for victims of discrimination under the Executive Order over the objection of the union.
The Administrative Law Judge upheld the agency's authority to obtain such relief in a consent decree, and held that the evidence presented at the fairness hearing demonstrated that retroactive seniority relief was appropriate in this case.
In Roberts the union intervenor — the Teamsters — voted to approve the retroactive seniority and signed the decree.
In FY 1992, recommended decisions were issued in seven cases, and SOL filed exceptions and/or responses to exceptions in all seven.
One of the recommended decisions —Jacksonville Shipyards — involved a pattern and practice of sex discrimination against women seeking jobs as laborers.
In his decision the Administrative Law Judge rejected SOL's statistical and anecdotal proof and refused to consider as dispositive the company's admissions obtained during discovery.
Exceptions will be filed early in fiscal year 1993.
The implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) continued to generate substantial activity.
SOL attorneys helped develop a joint EEOC-OFCCP coordination rule designed to carry out the ADA mandate that complaints of discrimination falling within the overlapping jurisdiction of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act be handled in a manner that avoids duplication of effort and prevents the imposition of inconsistent or conflicting standards.
SOL contributed extensive assistance to the EEOC in its preparation of substantive nondiscrimination regulations under the ADA based on the Department's experience under section 503.
SOL also assisted OFCCP in comprehensive revisions of the agency's section 503 and Vietnam Era Veterans'Readjustment Assistance Act regulations, intended to conform the nondiscrimination provisions of those regulations to the EEOC's ADA regulations and to update and improve the regulations.
SOL also advised several program agencies about the implications of the ADA for their programs.
Another area of continuing activity was OFCCP's glass ceiling initiative.
Glass ceiling is à reference to organizational barriers to minorities and women that limit their access to, and opportunities in, corporate management positions.
SOL assisted OFCCP in preparing briefing materials on the glass ceiling initiative, reviewed for OFCCP a comprehensive compliance manual chapter on the conduct of glass ceiling investigations and reviewed the Secretary's follow-up report on the glass ceiling initiative, Pipelines of Progress.
SOL also has helped develop two sets of Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) regulations.
SOL helped OFCCP develop regulations implementing section 481 of JTPA.
Under that section, federal contractors which satisfactorily participate in training programs for specified eligible individuals (native Americans, migrant farm workers and the economically disadvantaged) shall receive credit toward their affirmative action obligations under Executive Order 11246.
SOL attorneys furnished a broad range of legal services in support of the Bureau of International Labor Affairs and the growing mission of the Department in international affairs.
In international trade negotiations, SOL attorneys served on three interagency committees negotiating provisions of the North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) concerning temporary entry of business persons, import safeguards, and dispute settlement.
SOL provided legal counsel to several other such negotiating committees.
Legal counsel was given to various cooperative projects in occupational safety and health, child labor, and labor statistics.
This was done to implement the Memorandum of Understanding between the Department and the Mexican Secretariat of Labor in furtherance of the Administration's pledge to pursue a bilateral cooperation program on labor issues with Mexico on a parallel track with NAFTA negotiations.
In this connection, SOL attorneys contributed planning and research for a labor law conference regarding U.S. and Mexican labor law held in Mexico City in October 1992.
A variety of legal services supported the Department's participation in international organizations, including especially the International Labor Organization (ILO), the United Nations, and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
SOL attorneys prepared annual reports on American law and practice relative to all ILO Conventions (multi-national treaties) ratified by the United States and also relative to an ILO Convention concerning workers with family responsibilities.
This convention has not been ratified by the United States but was selected for study by the ILO Governing Body.
Extensive responses on behalf of the United States Government also were prepared to refute charges filed with the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association.
The Solicitor of Labor continued to chair the Tripartite Advisory Panel on International Labor Standards (TAPILS).
In support of the Panel, SOL attorneys provided extensive legal research and drafting services on the extent to which American law and practice is compatible with selected ILO Conventions, with a view to possible ratification by the U.S.
The three ILO Conventions under such intensive study by TAPILS concerned labor administration, employment discrimination and vocational rehabilitation.
Legal services also were supplied by the Solicitor's office in support of Department technical assistance projects to help European nations of the former Communist bloc develop market economies.
In immigration, the Office of the Solicitor advised and assisted in preparing final rules for, and in initial implementation of, Immigration Act of 1990 programs (alien crewmembers in longshore work, alien student workers, and nonimmigrant professionals in specialized occupations) and on the temporary alien agricultural labor certification (H-2A) program.
SOL attorneys worked with the United States Employment Service, the Wage and Hour Division of the Employment Standards Administration and the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration to advise on such H-2A issues as worker transportation, wage rates and deductions from pay.
Litigation regarding the permanent alien labor certification program under the Immigration and Nationality Act continued with a marked degree of success.
In Warmtex Enterprises, Inc. v. Martin, (9th Cir. 1992), the court agreed with the Department's position that the petitioner's refusal to even conduct a telephone interview of the five available U.S. workers (or to pay for the transportation of the workers to the interview) demonstrated a lack of good faith in its recruitment of U.S. workers.
The court found that the five U.S. workers had not been rejected for lawful job-related reasons as required by the regulations, and that this interpretation by the Department was a reasonable construction of the statute.
In Bulk Farms Inc. v. Martin, (9th Cir. 1992), a favorable decision was received upholding a critical portion of the regulations in the permanent labor certification program, which requires that the employment necessary to qualify for a permanent labor certification be employment for a person or entity other than oneself (a foreign entrepreneur in this case).
The court accepted SOL's arguments, holding that the permanent labor certification program was intended to provide U.S. employers with needed workers, not to provide a method of entry to enterprising foreign workers.
Further, in Kooritzky v. Martin, (D.D.C. 1992), the Department received a favorable decision in a case challenging, on Administrative Procedure Act and substantive grounds, a significant regulatory change to the permanent labor certification program.
The court upheld the Department's rule prohibiting the previous practice of substitution of aliens on a labor certification.
The Solicitor's Office has had an increasing enforcement litigation workload under the employment-based nonimmigrant visa programs enacted in 1992 amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act.
An administrative proceeding is ongoing under the Immigration Nursing Relief Act to determine whether the New York City public hospital system should be disqualified from employing foreigners as registered nurses on F-1A visas.
In FY 1992, SOL attorneys gave legal counsel on the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974, participated in several important regulatory projects, received several favorable court rulings, resolved a number of cases by judicially entered consent decree, and pursued an active program of enforcement actions under ERISA.
The Solicitor's Office allocated substantial resources to enforcement actions in the pension area involving purchases of annuities from insurance companies such as Executive Life (Martin v. BMC Industries, Inc., No. 3-92-183 (D. Minn. filed March 24, 1992) and Martin v. Smith International, Inc., No.
CV-92-1196-HLH(Kx) (C.D. Cal. filed February 25, 1992)) and Presidential Life (Martin v. Strouse-Adler, No. 3:92-34 (JAC) (D. Conn. filed January 23, 1992)).
In the Executive Life cases, ŠOL filed suit against the employer and plan fiduciaries, alleging they imprudently selected Executive Life as the annuity provider for the plan without a meaningful analysis of Executive Life's creditworthiness.
In addition, two cases filed in previous years involving the same issues were favorably resolved by consent decrees requiring defendants to make up any losses to the plans, Martin v. Magnetek, No. 91-C-613 (E.D. Wis. filed June 12, 1991 and Martin v. Geosource, No.
H-91-3196 (S.D. Tex. filed October 30, 1991).
There was also litigation involving multiple employer welfare arrangements, health and welfare plans generally regulated by state or Federal authorities.
SOL attorneys filed two actions alleging violations of ERISA arising from the failure to actuarially determine and maintain sufficient asset levels and reserves to enable the plan to pay the promised health benefits, Martin v. Beltz, No. 92-1660-RMT (C.D. Cal. filed March 17, 1992) and Martin v. Loeb, No.
CV-92-2680 (E.D.N.Y. filed June 8, 1992).
In employee stock ownership plans (ESOP), the Solicitor's Office filed suit alleging that the trustee of an EŠOP and others violated ERISA by failing to override the ESOP plan document's pass-through voting and tendering provisions in the course of responding to competing tender offers, in Martin v. NationsBank Trust Co., No. 192-CV-1474-HTW (N.D. Ga. filed June 15, 1992).
In Martin v. South Carolina National Bank, No. 92-298-1-MAC(DF) (M.D. Ga. filed July 24, 1992) SOL alleged that the plan trustee and others violated ERISA by relying on an appraisal which failed to consider debt placed on the company in purchasing company stock.
Pursuant to a complaint and consent decree simultaneously entered on September 1, 1992, in Martin v. Boeing Company, No.
C92-1376 (W.D. Wash. filed September 1, 1992), Boeing agreed to pay the retirement plan over $22 million to compensate for the improper transfer of units in a pooled real estate investment fund.
On July 9, 1992, a consent decree was entered in Martin v. Mills, No.
CV291-26 (S.D. Ga. filed January 30, 1991) requiring the payment of $2,000,000 in restitution as a result of purchases of employer stock for more than adequate consideration.
Significant appellate and trial court decisions wére also obtained.
In Martin v. Feilen Meats, 965 F. 2d 660 (8th Cir. 1992), the court held that defendants breached their fiduciary duties to the ESÓP by engaging in a series of self-dealing transactions which reduced the value of the company stock, the ESOP's only asset, to zero.
In Martin v. Levy, 957 F.2d 1020 (2d Cir. 1991), the court affirmed a permanent injunction barring a number of entities from dealing with ERISA plans based on the collateral estoppel effect of a previous summary judgment finding violations of ÉRISA.
In In re Masters Mates & Pilots Pension Plan and IRAP Litigation (Cullen v. Riley), 957 F.2d 1020 (2nd Cir. 1991) the court held that, subject to a fairness hearing, an ERISA settlement may include a bar order cutting off third-party claims for contribution or indemnity.
On March 30, 1992, the court in Martin v. Harline, 15 Empl.
Ben.
Cas.
BNA] 1138 (D. Utah 1992), ordered a bank director to pay restitution of $760,000 as a result of his imprudence in selecting, monitoring and failing to remove the trustee of the ESOP who purchased stock at prices far in excess of fair market value.
During the year, SOL attorneys also counseled the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration and participated in several important regulatory, exemptive and interpretive projects under ERISA and the Federal Employees Retirement System Act of 1986 (FERSA).
1992); 57 FR 5184 (February 12, 1992) and amending Prohibited Transaction Exemption (PTE) T88-1 to extend certain ERISA class exemptions to FERSA, 57 FR 8689 (March 11, 1992).
As part of an expanded program for assessing civil penalties for failure to file timely annual reports, a grace period allowing plan administrators an opportunity to file overdue reports without incurring the full penalty was established, 57 FR 14436 (April 20, 1992); a revised enforcement policy for the trust requirement for welfare plans with participant contributions was announced, 57 FR 23272 (June 2, 1992), and the grace period was extended so that plan administrators of top hat plans could take advantage of the reduced penalties, 57 FR 33019 (July 24, 1992); 57 FR 43477 (September 21, 1992).
In FY 1992, SOL attorneys worked closely with officials of the Department in drafting proposed bills and related background materials, presenting the Department's views on pending legislation, and giving technical assistance to Congressional committees.
SOL attorneys prepared and reviewed 55 statements for presentation by officials of the Department before committees of the Congress.
These officials testified on legislative and oversight issues, such as job training and school-to-work transition, the impact of defense base closings, retirement income policy and ERISA enforcement, immigration, occupational safety and health, unemployment compensation, the North American Free-Trade Agreement, enforcement of wage-hour laws, and the black lung program.
In addition, 97 reports to the Office of Management and Budget and Congressional committees were prepared on a broad spectrum of legislative proposals of interest to the Department.
SOL attorneys also participated in developing major pieces of legislation in FY 1992.
On September 7, 1992, the President signed into law P.L. 102-367, the Job Training Reform Amendments of 1992, a bill to comprehensively revise the Job Training Partnership Act to improve the targeting of programs to those facing serious barriers to employment, enhance the quality of services provided, promote coordination of human resource programs serving the disadvantaged, and strengthen fiscal and program accountability.
The legislation signed was based on a draft by SOL attorneys and transmitted by the Department to the Congress on May 22, 1991, and upon continuing technical assistance provided to the Congress over the following year.
On April 28, 1992, the President transmitted to Congress the Job Training 2000 Act, introduced as S. 2633 and H.R. 5038.
This legislation would reform the Federal vocational training system to meet future workforce needs by establishing a network of local skill centers to serve as a common point of entry to vocational training.
On May 13, 1992, the President transmitted to the Congress the National Youth Apprenticeship Act, introduced as S. 2745 and H.R. 5220.
This legislation would establish a national framework for implementing comprehensive youth apprenticeship programs to offer a high-quality learning alternative for youth making the transition from school to work.
Both initiatives were drafted by SÖL attorneys.
SOL attorneys also helped develop other Departmental legislative initiatives in such other areas as pension and benefit protection and the coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
In addition, SOL attorneys provided technical assistance to Congressional committees in relation to other job training initiatives, urban aid, adjustment assistance to dislocated workers (including defense workers), and the unemployment compensation program.
The Solicitor's Office represented the Department in a wide range of internal labor and employee relations cases.
SOL represented the Department in all unfair labor practice complaints, clarification of unit petitions and representation petitions filed before the Federal Labor Relations Authority.
The Division assisted the Department of Justice and/or U.S. Attorney offices in representing the Department in U.S. Court of Appeals and District Court cases involving internal labor and employee relations issues.
SOL attorneys prevailed in an important Court of Appeals case involving drug testing of employees who are in testing-designated positions (usually positions with important health and safety responsibilities or which require top secret security clearance).
In American Federation of Government Employees v. Lynn A. Martin, et al. (9th Cir., August 5, 1992), the Department appealed the decision of the District Court that prohibited it from drug testing employees in testing designated positions based on a reasonable suspicion of off-duty drug use or impairment.
The Ninth Circuit reversed the District Court on this point, holding that the Fourth Amendment did not prohibit testing of employees in testing- designated positions based on a reasonable suspicion of off-duty drug use or impairment.
SOL prevailed before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in an appeal of a decision of the Merit Šystems Protection Board (MSPB) upholding the Department's removal of one of its employees for insubordination, engaging in abusive and offensive conduct, and possession of a dangerous weapon.
The Office of the Solicitor handled some regional and all national office appeals and complaints by Department employees and applicants for employment before the Merit Systems Protection Board and Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
In one case, the EEOC Office of Federal Operations upheld a decision that the Department did not discriminate against an employment applicant on the basis of his race, sex, national origin or age when it did not include him among the best qualified candidates for a supervisory position in the national office of the Solicitor.
The Solicitor's Office successfully handled numerous arbitrations, EEOC hearings, and MSPB appeals which raised difficult and novel issues including matters relating to handicap discrimination and sexual misconduct.
It also represented the Department before arbitrators in cases brought under the collective bargaining agreement between the Department and AFGE, Local 12, the union which represents Department of Labor employees in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area.
SOL continued to give legal advice to the Directorate of Civil Rights on internal equal employment opportunity matters.
It also provided legal advice to Department management on a wide range of labor and employee relations issues.
SOL attorneys performed a wide variety of general house counsel functions and provided administrative legal services.
These functions inluded furnishing advice on a range of laws applicable to federal funds and personnel matters, and giving legal counsel on a variety of special projects.
Legal support also was given to the Office of Information and Public Affairs, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Women's Bureau, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management and the Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs.
The Solicitor's Office advised on the Ethics in Government Act and other conflict-of-interest laws, orders and regulations.
The Office devoted substantial resources to implement Executive Order 12731 (“Principles of Ethical Conduct for Government Officers and Employees") and the Ethics Reform Act of 1989.
In particular, the Solicitor's Office began preparing for a major revision of the basic Standards of Ethical Conduct for Executive Branch Employees.
Final regulations were issued by the Office of Government Ethics in August 1992 and will take effect in January 1993.
They will impact a wide range of employee activities.
The Office of Government Ethics also issued regulations imposing new requirements for training of employees in the area of ethics, as well as new rules on financial disclosure reports.
The Office of the Solicitor has taken the lead role in implementing these new requirements.
In addition, as 1992 was a presidential election year, substantial resources were devoted by SOL to training and providing legal advice on the Hatch Act, which limits participation in partisan political activities by most federal employees.
SOL attorneys gave general legal advice on questions relating to the Administrative Procedure Act, the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), the Privacy Act (PA), the Federal Advisory Committee Act, the Paperwork Reduction Act, the Federal Register Act and several related laws.
The handling of administrative appeals under the FOIA and PA continues to be a major responsibility.
In FY 1992, action was completed on over 320 appeals.
We also reviewed and/or issued determinations on over 1,200 subpoena requests served upon Department officials arising out of private litigation in which the Department is not a party.
In fiscal year 1992, we provided considerable advice to the Department on the initial implementation of two new and important laws, the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act and the Negotiated Rulemaking Act, including the development of policies, and a handbook to facilitate program use.
SOL attorneys also advised the Justice Department concerning claims filed against the Department of Labor under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA), processed about 4,000 FTCA claims and gave litigation support to the Justice Department.
In Fiscal Year (FY) 1992, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy (OASP) continued to coordinate the policy review and decision-making process for the Department of Labor (Department).
The major support vehicle was the Policy Review Board (PRB).
Chaired by the Assistant Secretary for Policy, the PRB offered an open forum for review and discussion of important issues affecting the Department.
In FY 1992 the PRB established permanent subcommittees on research, regulations and legislation to enhance policy planning and coordination.
When the President declared a moratorium on, and review of, regulations in January 1992 he directed the Secretary to review Department regulations to assure that economic factors are adequately taken into account.
OASP provided the principal staff support.
As a result of this review, which included comments solicited from the public, the Department began to change the procedures for developing, revising and enforcing regulations.
Pursuant to the extensions of the regulatory review by the President, the Department continued these efforts.
The sluggish economy in FY 1992 prompted increased emphasis on timely analysis and interpretation of macroeconomic and labor market statistics.
OASP gave senior officials daily updates of key economic reports.
Each month OASP also distributed a comprehensive economic analysis and briefing book that reviewed economic and labor market activity and the short-term outlook.
Another significant activity in FY 1992 was production of the Secretary's Goals and Objectives Program to serve as a Department management tool to measure performance and monitor progress throughout the year.
The goals and objectives, which dealt with such issues as training, safety in the workplace, pension policy, enforcement efforts, empowerment of the individual and technical assistance to Eastern Europe, were broken down into a detailed, month-by-month map of steps coordinating both implementation and ongoing administration of the program.
FY 1992 was a year of much activity in workplace substance abuse prevention.
Substance Abuse in Small Business" was held in Washington, D.C. in July 1992.
It attracted key public and private sector leaders to discuss what must be done to help the small business community deal with workplace substance abuse.
The Substance Abuse Information Database was significantly refined and expanded and will be available for distribution early in FY 1993.
As part of the research project to evaluate the effectiveness of employee assistance and drug testing programs being done in conjunction with the National Institute on Drug Abuse, ten focus groups met around the country to gather input from experts in the fields of substance abuse and evaluation.
Preliminary work began on a public information campaign to raise the awareness of the small business community of the impact of substance abuse in the workplace and what can be done to address the problem.
Following enactment of the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act of 1990, OASP was designated the lead agency in making greater use of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) techniques for disputes in which the Department is a party.
ADR has the potential to help the Department better manage its caseloads by removing from traditional litigation those cases that can be resolved quickly and satisfactorily using less formal processes.
In FY 1992, the Department conducted a pilot test using inhouse mediators trained by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to resolve enforcement cases in the Philadelphia Region.
The pilot was very successful in resolving cases that would have resulted in lengthy and costly litigation.
The reaction among Department managers and attorneys and outside parties was favorable to the process.
The Office was responsible for implementing several initiatives to help improve the effectiveness of the Department's enforcement programs.
Office staff continued development of a public information handbook summarizing the kinds of compliance activities required of employers and compliance assistance services available from the Department.
Also, work proceeded on the development of the Department's enforcement tracking system.
The PRB continued its oversight and coordination of important enforcement functions.
The Office of Program Economics devoted a significant portion of its time in FY 1992 to immigration issues, including the implementation of Department responsibilities under the Immigration Act of 1990 and other statutes.
OASP oversaw the development of new regulations required to implement the Act, carried out by the Department Immigration Task Force, comprised of staff from throughout the Department.
All products developed by the task force were reviewed by an expert advisory panel and then by a steering committee.
The Assistant Secretary for Policy served on the Steering Committee, and the Director of the Office of Program Economics served on the panel.
The Office continued to lead the Department in implementing the mandate, established by the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, of estimating changes in the labor supply for seasonal agricultural work from FY 1990 through FY 1993.
These estimates helped determine whether there were shortages of seasonal agricultural workers during each of the fiscal years in question.
The annual shortage estimates determined whether additional aliens could be admitted into the United States or they could acquire the status of aliens admitted for temporary residence for seasonal agricultural work.
Annual shortage estimates were zero for FY 1990 through FY 1993.
The estimates of changes in the labor supply for seasonal agricultural work were based on surveys of existing farm workers and surveys of the rural unemployed, both conducted by the Office.
The survey of existing farmworkers, the National agricultural Worker Survey (NAWS), was conducted three times a year through FY 1992.
It involved interviews of about 10,000 farm workers over four years.
The NAWS also yielded several reports on the demographics of farmworkers, which have proven useful to federal and state agencies.
Another major immigration-related task for the Office in FY 1992 was the continuation of the Immigration Nursing Relief Advisory Committee, as required by the Immigration Nursing Relief Act (INRA) of 1989.
The mandate of the Committee was to advise the Secretary of Labor on the effectiveness of the lNRA and on needed changes to that legislation.
The Committee recommendations to the Secretary are to be based on an in-depth assessment, over four years, of the impact of the new legislation on meeting the nursing shortage in the United States.
The 18-member Committee adopted a research agenda which is currently ongoing.
In FY 1992 six major contracts implemented the program.
The Committee is staffed by office analysts.
In January 1992 the President declared a moratorium on issuing new regulations and directed the Secretary to review Department regulations and how they are developed.
The moratorium was developed to assure that the economic consequences of regulations are adequately taken into account.
Assistant Secretary for Policy.
Comments were solicited from the public on all of the Department's existing and proposed regulations.
These comments and the review of existing regulations enabled the Department to target needed changes.
As a result, the Department began to make significant changes in the way it establishes priorities for developing new regulations or revising existing ones, in the way regulations are developed, in their implementation, and in the compliance assistance given the regulated community by the Department.
The Office acted as the principal staff in this effort and continues to support the PRB and its new permanent subcommittees on regulations, research and legislation.
The Office also provides specific expertise in such areas as: occupational safety and health; wage, hour and child labor standards; pension, health and welfare benefits programs; workers' compensation, nondiscrimination and affirmative action programs.
The Office is responsible for the development, tracking and execution of the Department's portion of the Regulatory Program of the United States and the Semi-Annual Regulatory Agenda.
It works closely with Department agencies and OMB staff.
Since the Department is one of the largest federal regulatory agencies, this involves dealing with some 85 significant regulatory actions and other, minor ones.
In each case, the Office is responsible for ensuring that: there is adequate justification for each intended regulatory action, including an analysis of alternatives to rulemaking; regulatory proposals include valid risk assessment, regulatory impact, paperwork and other appropriate special analyses; materials are ready for scheduled meetings of the PRB; issues needing discussion are brought to the attention of PRB members; decisions of the Secretary and the PRB are implemented and Department agencies are assisted as needed in gaining OMB and other approvals.
New procedures were implemented to assure adequate peer review of risk assessments.
Safety and Health.
Work was done on a host of regulatory efforts or studies, including: hazard communications to exposed workers; improved mechanisms for monitoring miner exposure to coal dust; proposals to update and extend permissible exposure limits for hundreds of substances used in the construction, maritime and agricultural industries; reporting of fatalities and multiple hospitalizations; explosives and blasting in mining; process safety management (hazardous material handling requirements under the Clean Air Act Amendments); formaldehyde; new civil penalty procedures for mining; training requirements for miners; ergonomics; 4'4 methylenedianiline; cadmium; high voltage longwall equipment; cranes and derricks; glycol ethers; nonasbestiform anthophyllite, tremolite and actinolite; steel erection (for which new negotiated rulemaking techniques are being used); bloodborne pathogens; ventilation in underground coal mining and permit-required confined spaces.