I am pleased to issue the Department of Labor’s first accountability report.
This report presents financial, program and performance data on the Department for Fiscal Year 1997 and charts our progress in meeting three strategic goals: A Prepared Workforce--to enhance opportunities for America’s workforce; A Secure Workforce--to promote the economic security of workers and families; and Quality Workplaces--to foster workplaces that are safe, healthy, fair and free of discrimination.
I am committed to accomplishing the Department’s strategic goals for America’s workers, retirees and their families, and I am committed to ensuring that any taxpayer money invested in these goals achieves results.
I am proud to report that the Department’s Inspector General has issued an unqualified opinion on the Department’s Financial Statements for FY 1997.
This provides us with a solid foundation for meeting the high standards of financial reporting required by the Government Performance and Results Act and other statutes.
With this opinion and the certifications of senior managers, I can certify with reasonable assurance that the Department’s systems of accounting and internal controls are in compliance with the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act.
Maintaining the public’s trust and providing sound stewardship of their funds is a goal vital to me and this Department.
This report represents an initial step in presenting the programs and achievements that warrant the public’s confidence in future investments in the Department of Labor.
I am pleased to join with Secretary Herman in presenting the Department of Labor’s Accountability Report for Fiscal Year 1997.
This report, our first under a pilot authorized by the Government Management Reform Act of 1994, consolidates in one document information that was previously distributed in several separate reports.
The Department is proud of its accomplishments in financial management.
The Department’s Inspector General issued an unqualified, or “clean,” opinion on our Fiscal Year 1997 consolidated financial statements.
Under the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Act of 1990 and the Government Management Reform Act of 1994, all Federal agencies are required to produce annual financial statements, and to have the statements audited.
DOL is among the first few cabinet level agencies to achieve this unqualified level of financial performance.
The audit report also states that no material weaknesses were found in the department’s system of internal controls that would affect the accuracy of financial statements.
As noted by our Inspector General, the Department also made significant strides during Fiscal Year 1997 in closing previously reported internal control problems.
With this solid foundation, we continue to work to ensure that all financial systems comply with the requirements of the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act, and to resolve and close remaining internal control issues raised in the 1997 financial statements audit.
We expect this first Accountability Report to provide a baseline for timely, accurate and useful financial information upon which we can build and improve in the years to come.
The Department’s Strategic Plan and annual performance plans will serve in the future as cornerstones for this effort.
Created by a law signed by President William H. Taft on March 4, 1913, the U.S. Department of Labor is one of the oldest cabinet level departments in the Federal government.
The Department of Labor fosters and promotes the welfare of the job seekers, wage earners, and retirees of the United States by improving their working conditions, advancing their opportunities for profitable employment, protecting their retirement, health care, and other benefits.
In carrying out this mission, the Department administers a variety of Federal labor laws guaranteeing workers' rights to safe and healthful working conditions; a minimum hourly wage and overtime pay; freedom from employment discrimination; unemployment insurance; and workers' compensation.
The Department also protects workers' pension, health care, and other benefit rights; provides for job-training programs; helps workers find jobs; helps employers find workers; works to strengthen free collective bargaining; and keeps track of changes in employment, prices, and other national economic measurements.
As we prepare to enter the 21st century, the Department will ensure that it has an effective strategy for improving the lives of America's working families and retirees.
We will assist all workers in their efforts to achieve economic security with rising wages, pensions, health benefits, and opportunities to improve their skills in safe and healthful workplaces free from discrimination.
The Department will encourage every workplace to support families, respect diversity, and foster cooperation between employers and workers.
Our challenge will be to assist those trying to enter the workforce to get good jobs, to expand opportunity and security for all workers, and to maintain our pre-eminence in the broad field of labor economics and statistics.
The steps taken today to prepare the workforce will determine America's leadership in the next century.
Working with public, private, and non-profit partners to achieve common goals, the Department will employ flexible, innovative, and coordinated responses to meet our challenges and to provide all working families with opportunity, security, and quality workplaces.
With the arrival of Secretary Herman in FY 1997, the Department began to refine its goals and priorities to meet the needs of America’s working men and women in the new century.
While the original purpose of the 1913 Act remains the central tenet for the Department’s programs, The Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) provided an opportunity to develop a modern framework for meeting the challenges of helping every American participate and prosper in today’s highly competitive global economy.
GPRA has provided a valuable set of tools to enhance the Department’s program and managerial effectiveness.
Our work--and this report-- is organized around Secretary Herman’s three strategic goals developed in formulating the Department’s FY 1999 Performance Plan.
This report will be refined in future years to more closely align the Department’s programs with detailed outcomes within the Secretary’s three goal strategic framework.
The Department is also proceeding with implementation of the governmentwide cost accounting standard.
Future accountability reports will be enhanced to closely relate program costs with related outcomes and performance goals.
This initial report summarizes more detailed program performance and financial data that accompanies the Department’s FY 1997 Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Department and its state and local government partners advance the future of America's workers by promoting improvements in training of our nation's working women and men, and by fostering changes in skill levels to expand future job choices.
Fiscal Year 1997 was a year characterized by growing recognition and agreement by practitioners and policy makers at all levels that today's array of Federal job placement and training programs, while well intended, do not effectively meet the needs of today's economy and need to be replaced.
Considerable work has been done this year--both legislatively and administratively--to establish more coherent and systematic approaches to workforce development.
During Fiscal Year 1997 both the House and the Senate took positive steps toward job training reform.
In May of 1997, the House passed the Employment, Training, and Literacy Enhancement Act -- H.R. 1385. In September 1997, the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources reported S. 1186 -- the Workforce Investment Partnership Act.
While the Administration did not agree with every provision in H.R. 1385 and S. 1186, both bills represent a significant step forward in building an integrated job training and employment system for America's current and future workers.
The bills incorporate the key principles articulated in the President's G.I. Bill for America's Workers.
Those principles include: providing resources for training directly to adults so they can make informed choices without bureaucratic interference; streamlining Federal training programs for adults by organizing them within the One-Stop Career Center delivery system; and ensuring that the private sector is a full partner; and establishing strong accountability.
The Department will continue to work with Congress to improve and complete action on this legislation in FY 1998 to achieve our shared goal of workforce development reform.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and its partners and stakeholders have long accepted the importance of achieving performance goals and increasing customer satisfaction.
To this end, we continue moving toward a new workforce development system that provides greater State and local flexibility.
More importantly, it also provides easier access for all job seekers, employers, and others to get jobs, skills, and career information as well as information on the eligibility requirements for programs in the community, testing and assessment services, and help with the job search.
ETA places a high priority on measuring and improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its employment and training programs.
The agency collects detailed data on its program participants in its State administered Job Training Partnership Act program through its management information system, monitors program results through a performance measurement and management system, and evaluates programs through rigorous studies of their costs and net impacts.
ETA routinely provides feedback to its State and local partners on their performance, and focuses not only on low performers to raise In the summer of 1985, a youth who was confined to an electric wheelchair applied to participate in the Summer Youth Employment and Training Program in Calloway County, Kentucky.
This created the challenge of locating an appropriate worksite that could provide both accessibility and meaningful work.
The search ended at the County Court Clerk's office.
In spite of his situation, Ray's winning attitude and cheerful disposition swept aside any uncertainties of his fellow workers and quickly won him the support of the entire office.
In September of 1985, Ray entered the Calloway County In-School Program.
The County Court Clerk's office, requested that he be allowed to continue his work experience at their location.
After graduating from high school in May of 1986, he continued working at the County Court Clerk's office throughout college and became a full-time employee following graduation.
On April 17, 1995, Ray was appointed County Court Clerk of Calloway County.
In November of 1995, he campaigned and won the local election to officially serve in this capacity.
His salary now ranges in the area of $30,000.00.
Ray's hard work and dedication, attitude and ability, helped him to succeed in spite of adversity and pain.
JTPA's summer program opened a door to success for Ray.
For some time, ETA has been investing in management information which provides American taxpayers, the Congress, and the workforce development community with information on client characteristics, the services they receive, and the effect of services in terms of employment, earnings, and educational attainments.
This information is important to assess progress in achieving program goals, and also to enable State and local programs to compare performance results and set performance benchmarks when serving diverse populations and utilizing different service strategies.
Providing critical performance feedback to States is essential to promoting continuous improvement.
Every year, Governors receive performance "report cards" on each local JTPA service delivery area.
These give States an idea of how their programs "stack up" nationally on performance results as well as on those factors that may affect results - the local economy and the client groups being served.
Each local program is ranked on each performance measure, giving the State some indication of how much performance improvement will be needed before a local program is considered to be among the "best in the business."
Although ETA believes it has good performance measures for some of its programs, much more needs to be done to provide valid, reliable data on program outcomes to the Congress and the American taxpayer.
An OIG audit identified the need to improve performance measurement in employment and training programs through design and adoption of a system that better fosters accountability, measures return on investment, focuses on outcomes and moves toward fewer-but more cross-cutting-program measures.
ETA's Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plan for FY 1999 outline the strategies and resources needed to ensure that high-quality performance management and measurement plans are implemented at the Federal, State and local levels, and that programs are operated in the most efficient and effective manner possible.
ETA has implemented a Standardized Participant Information Report (SPIR) for Titles II and III of JTPA, initiated a series of pilot studies to identify practical problems associated with using UI wage record data for performance standards, and has developed a preliminary list of conceptual measures for assessing system-wide performance.
During Program Year 1996, ending June 30, 1997, approximately $977 million in Federal funds were distributed to State governments to provide training and other services to economically disadvantaged adults and youth.
Service Delivery Areas (SDAs).
These programs offer basic skills and job training and support services.
Private Industry Councils (PICs) composed of business, labor, and other community leaders direct local JTPA programs.
PIC members are appointed by local elected officials.
Approximately 456,600 participants were served in adult and youth programs in FY 1996 representing a 61,700 decrease in participants from the previous program year.
Under the Title II-B Summer Youth Employment and Training Program, $871 million was available for the summer of 1997.
According to preliminary figures from mid-summer reports, 492,933 youth were working in Federally funded summer jobs, approximately 82,200 more than in the summer of 1996.
In addition to gaining work experience, summer youth program participants are evaluated to determine if they have attained local educational standards.
Those who do not meet those standards may be enrolled in remedial education as part of their summer program to improve their academic performance.
The purpose of the extra education is to provide the basic skills needed for academic success during the regular school year.
The Job Corps program is a highly intensive, primarily residential training program for severely disadvantaged youth aged 16 through 24.
Enrollees are offered housing, food, medical care, education, vocational training and supportive services.
The program prepares youth for stable, productive employment, and/or entrance into vocational and technical schools, junior colleges and other institutions for further education and training.
Richard has changed his life dramatically since he left a motorcycle gang associated with drugs and crime.
When Richard’s wife left home and he became the sole provider for his two young daughters, he realized he needed financial stability and a change in his life.
Richard had experience as a machine operator, but since he lacked Computer Numeric Control (CNC) knowledge, his employment opportunities were limited.
Richard’s welfare case worker referred him to the Private Industry Council (PIC).
With the Council’s support, he soon started courses at the community college to enhance his machining skills.
Richard struggled throughout the two years of training but received unending support and encouragement from the Council.
Richard found an understanding employer who provided the flexibility he needed to manage his family and attend class.
Throughout his training, Richard maintained a 3.75 GPA while working full-time.
He earned a certificate in CNC Operations in December 1996.
Today, Richard continues to work in manufacturing as a CNC Operator and is pursuing an Associate’s degree.
He no longer receives government assistance.
The percentage of Job Corps enrollees placed in jobs, school, or the military after completion of the program was 80 percent in PY 1996, compared to 75 percent in PY 1995.
The ETA staff is addressing OIG audit recommendations to improve the effectiveness of the Job Corps experience for disadvantaged youth and to attain effective GPRA program measurement.
The Job Corps program recently completed a major Student Payroll and Management Information System that has greatly improved the accuracy and efficiency of the payment process and a reliable base for gathering trainee information.
Building on this success, an improved system of accounting for Job Corps real and personal property is under development.
The current systems consist primarily of manual spreadsheets which are updated and recorded in the general ledger of the Department at year end only.
They are not reconcilable to the cost reports submitted by Job Corps contractors.
ETA’s Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training promotes apprenticeships and allied training conducted by various industries, recommends and approves apprenticeship program standards, registers apprentices, and provides technical assistance to program sponsors.
394,064 apprentices had been registered by the end FY 1997, an States, Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia.
These programs offer basic skills development, job training and support services to special targeted groups.
Native American Programs are designed to provide a wide range of job training and support services to Indians and other Native Americans to improve their employability and help them secure permanent employment.
For PY 1996, this program was funded at $52.5 million and served approximately 18,700 participants, excluding those served under P.L. 102-477.
An estimated half of participating adults and youth were placed in employment after their participation.
The Migrant and Seasonal Farm Worker Program helps migrant and seasonal farm workers and their families by providing training and supportive services to those seeking stable year-round employment at a liveable wage and by improving the living standard of those who remain in the agricultural market.
In PY 1996, this program was funded at $69.3 million and served approximately 37,000 participants with a preliminary entered employment rate (the percentage of all individuals receiving services by the program who either obtain a job within 90 days, or are hired as a result of program referrals) of 77.7 percent.
As a child, Maria faced family hardships and continual upheavals that prevented her from receiving adequate formal education.
When she found out about Job Corps, the nation's largest residential job training program for at-risk youth, she enrolled at the El Paso Job Corps Center (now David L. Carrasco Job Corps Center) in the Clerk-Typist vocational training course.
After obtaining her high school diploma and completing her basic vocational training at the Center, Maria moved into Job Corps' Advanced Career Training Program at El Paso Community College to pursue her newfound goal--a career in social work.
In short order, Maria graduated from El Paso Community College with a 4.0 average and an Associate Degree in Human Services/Youth Services.
Determined to earn her Bachelor's Degree in Social Work, she enrolled at New Mexico State University (NMSU) and completed her degree while working full-time and raising a family.
In the eleven years since she graduated from Job Corps, Maria has held several full-time case worker positions and public service internships and has coordinated volunteer efforts with an array of community organizations.
In fact, Maria recently completed her Master's Degree in Social Work from NMSU and has now set her sights on earning a Ph.D and opening a private practice.
The Older Americans Program provides subsidized part-time work opportunities in community service activities for unemployed low-income persons aged 55 and over.
The program seeks to obtain unsubsidized employment for at least 20 percent of the available positions.
This objective has been reached consistently.
For PY 1996 ending June 30, 1997, $401 million was used to finance approximately 61,500 positions in which an estimated 92,000 individuals worked during the year.
The U.S. Employment Service seeks to match individuals seeking employment with employers seeking workers.
It is funded primarily through Federal employer taxes paid into the Unemployment Trust Fund.
Employment Service programs operated by States are authorized by the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933, as amended, and it operates in over 1,800 local offices in the fifty states, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, District of Columbia and Guam.
State Employment Services also administer programs through reimbursement agreements with the Department of Labor, such as the Alien Labor Certification program.
In PY 1996, about $761.7 million was provided to States for basic Employment Service operations.
18.4 million job applicants sought employment services, slightly down from 18.5 million in PY 1995.
During PY 1996, over 6 million job openings were received, an increase from the 5.9 million received the previous program year.
The total number of individuals who entered employment in PY 1996 was 3.3 million.
Total individuals placed in permanent jobs (150+ days) in PY 1996 was 1.7 million.
ETA is working to improve accountability over real property purchased with State Employment Security Agency (SESA) grant funds in which the Department maintains a reversionary interest.
ETA has issued a directive and plans follow-up to ensure that States follow established procedures and update and certify real property inventory.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and Training (OASVET) develops and promotes training and employment opportunities for veterans, giving priority of services to special disabled and disabled veterans.
VETS administers two major programs through the SESAs -the Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP) and the Local Veterans Employment Representative (LVER) program.
Emphasis is placed on getting jobs for harder to serve veterans such as disabled veterans, who have a significantly higher unemployment rate than other veterans and non-veterans.
VETS is effective in assisting all populations of veterans, as the chart demonstrates, by securing employment at a rate greater than 50% that of non-veterans.
There has been a slight decline in the number of veterans helped into jobs as greater emphasis is placed on getting jobs for harder to serve veterans with significantly higher unemployment rates than the remainder of the population.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is the principal fact-finding agency for the Federal Government in the field of labor economics.
BLS provides critical statistical and economic data on employment, unemployment, labor market demographics, prices, wages, job safety and health, productivity, and projections of job growth by occupation.
Most data come from voluntary responses to surveys of businesses or households conducted by BLS staff, by the Bureau of the Census (on a contractual basis), or in conjunction with cooperating State agencies.
BLS data play a large and important role in the development of other Federal statistics such as the Gross Domestic Product and other key economic indicators.
The assures veterans protection of their rights under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA); and, in partnership with the Office of Personnel Management conducts preliminary fact-finding on allegations from veterans that Federal agencies did not provide them appropriate Federal veterans' preference.
During PY 1996, SESAs, in part due to priority of services provided to special disabled, and disabled and other veterans, helped more than 510,000 veterans into jobs.
Congress, President, Federal Reserve Board, and other executive branch agencies use these statistics to determine national economic policy.
BLS data are also used by industry and labor in economic planning and collective bargaining and by other public and private institutions in a variety of planning and analytical activities.
In addition, BLS data directly affect the economy.
For example, the Consumer Price Index is used to adjust Social Security and Federal civilian and military retirement payments.
The Employment and Unemployment Statistics program also maintains an up-to-date "universe" file of establishments covered by the State Unemployment Insurance system, which BLS uses to select samples for its establishment-based surveys.
During 1997, the Current Employment Statistics (CES) program completed a two-year research effort to develop improved, probability-based sample design and estimation formulas.
The new design, which BLS will implement over the next several years, will improve reliability of the initial estimates of employment from the CES.
In October 1996, BLS launched a redesigned Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program.
With support from ETA, BLS expanded this program to an annual sample The goal of the Employment and Unemployment Statistics program is to analyze and publish accurate data on the labor force, employment and unemployment, and persons not in the labor force; labor market developments; characteristics of special worker groups, of 400,000 establishments and will produce detailed estimates of employment and earnings by occupation for the Nation, each State, and 500 local areas.
BLS also began implementing the standard industrial classification revision known as the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
The goals of the Prices and Living Conditions programs are to develop and publish comprehensive measures of price change in retail and primary markets and to conduct research to improve the measurement process.
The data provide the essential elements to analyze price behavior and interpret price change throughout the U.S. economy.
In 1997, BLS continued work on five major projects in the six-year revision of the Consumer Price Index.
The goals of the Compensation and Working Conditions program are: to study employee compensation using a broad range of data on workers' wages and salaries in many occupations, industries, and geographic areas; to develop information on employee benefits and the costs employers incur in providing those benefits; to compile statistics on the occurrence of work-related occupational injuries and illnesses; and to publish data on collective bargaining and labor management relations.
In 1997, BLS made considerable progress toward its goal of integrating three existing compensation surveys — the Occupational Compensation Survey Program, the Employment Cost Index, and the Employee Benefits Survey — into a single survey program, the National Compensation Survey (NCS).
The goals of the Productivity and Technology program are, in the domestic area, to measure and analyze productivity trends in major sectors of the economy and in individual industries; and, in the international area, to develop comparable measures of productivity, labor force, employment and unemployment, hourly compensation costs, and other economic indicators for selected countries.
The goals of the Employment Projections program are to develop information about the labor market approximately 10 years into the future, including labor force trends by sex, race, and age; employment trends by industry and occupation; and the implications of these trends on employment opportunities and education and training needs for youth and other specific groups in the population.
In 1997, BLS developed 1996-2006 projections for the year of the labor force, economic trends, and employment by industry and occupation.
The BLS prepared the 1998-99 editions of the Occupational Outlook Handbook and the Career Guide to Industries.
Effective financial management of grants and contracts should ensure that Federal funds are spent effectively, accounted for properly, and assist in detecting and preventing fraud, waste, mismanagement and abuse.
In recent years, the Department has made considerable strides toward improving it's financial management.
Prior financial statement audits by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) identified inaccurate and untimely grant information as a major accounting problem.
The need for improved reconciliation procedures, more timely recording of grantee cost information, better cost estimates, enforcement of fund control and financial reporting requirements, and cash management were cited as deficiencies.
These deficiencies were effectively closed through the development of improved and modernized financial systems, the design and regular production of additional management reports, and issuance of new and revised procedures.
While these actions closed the most serious OIG audit findings, a number of follow-up actions remain: - Although considerable progress in reviewing, revising and implementing procedures has been noted, ETA needs to review existing written procedures for a number of activities it performs as part of it's accounting for grants and contracts.
The OIG audit, as well as internal reviews conducted by ETA, have identified a number of areas where procedures are not being followed as intended or require further refinement.
Responsibilities to be addressed over the coming year include ETA's allocation of debts to specific grants, contracts and appropriations; grant accounting policies and procedures for ETA regional offices; national office oversight of regional office reconciliations of data received from the HHS grant payment system with ETA's system records; and the roles of ETA national and regional offices relative to audit resolution and closeout.
Many of these responsibilities and procedures, as well as internal controls, must be reexamined in light of continuing reductions and turnover in staff and technological advances.
Wherever possible, cross-cutting teams are being used.
For example, efforts are underway to form a workgroup of national and regional office staff to develop prototype grant accounting policies and procedures that may be adopted by ETA's ten regional offices.
The OIG expressed concerns about the frequency of revisions to cost information already input in ETA systems.
The OIG identified a need for new policies and procedures requiring proper support and authorization for adjustment transactions.
ETA agreed to review the procedures now in place and weigh the costs and benefits of changes similar to the OIG's recommendations.
ETA continues to have a problem with the lack of timely recording of grantee and contractor cost information.
The agency has committed to identifying grantees and contractors with chronic delinquent reporting and categorizing them as “high risk.”
This may result in restricting their ability to draw down cash advances, and instituting incremental payments based on grantee and contractor requests submitted directly to the Grant Officer.
The OIG has recommended that a number of accounting activities completed at year end for financial statements be performed throughout the year as part of ETA’s routine accounting.
These activities include grant and contract cost accruals, accounting for debt management and cash collection activity and real and personal property, and the need to integrate these and other systems to conform with statutory requirements contained in the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996.
ETA and the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) are working collaboratively through an interagency work team to change how data is transmitted from ETA’s Grant and Contract Management Information System (GCMIS) to the Departmental accounting system (DOLARS), and to use DOLARS capabilities to address these shortcomings.
The OIG worked to achieve its goal of optimizing the use of funds appropriated for employment, training, and welfare-to-work programs by enhancing program performance and accountability.
In FY 1997, OIG financial and compliance audits of employment and training grants and contracts identified improper charges to the Government and disclosed low performance of programs or services.
Recommendations were made to improve services provided under the JTPA Title III program for dislocated workers.
The OIG also provided technical assistance and consultation to DOL on a number of employment and training issues and programs, including School-to-Work and workforce development performance measures.
Secretary Herman's key priorities for this strategic goal are to increase compliance with minimum wage and overtime requirements, ensure that working Americans are economically secure when they retire, provide more pensions for women and employees of small businesses, provide better access to health care, and facilitate community readjustment in those areas suffering from economic change by shortening periods of unemployment and increasing full-time jobs and wage replacement.
Only about half of all full-time workers in the private sector have pension coverage.
Three-quarters of workers in businesses with fewer than 100 employees are not covered by a pension plan.
Increasing access to the private pension system and assuring that private pensions, health, and other employee benefits are secure and properly administered are major priorities of Secretary Herman.
The Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) is responsible for the administration and enforcement of Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended (ERISA) and certain portions of the Federal Employee Retirement System Act of 1986 (FERSA).
PWBA's mission is to promote and protect the pension, health and other benefits of over 150 million participants and beneficiaries in six million private sector employee benefit plans controlling more than $3.5 trillion in assets.
During FY 1997, as part of the implementation of the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA), PWBA revised and recast its original 5-year strategic plan.
To set the foundation for the strategic plan, the agency established a preliminary set of performance measures.
During this effort, PWBA reexamined its data collection efforts to ensure that the performance being measured and reported provided the most thorough and accurate picture possible of PWBA's accomplishments in protecting the employee benefits of the American people.
Also included in the strategic plan are annual performance goals and objectives beginning in FY 1998.
PWBA will report on its revised performance measures beginning with the FY 1998 consolidated financial statements.
Guided by its mission and strategic goals, PWBA continued to implement a number of successful programs in the important areas of safeguarding workers retirement, health and other benefits, and providing assistance to the public.
PWBA prioritized efforts and allocated resources to implement programs within these functional areas in such a way that each program would complement the others by capitalizing on the interrelationships among its enforcement, reporting, compliance, and participant and planned assistance efforts.
In the area of customer service, PWBA introduced a number of public outreach and education initiatives.
These efforts targeted workers as well as employers and professionals in the plan benefits community.
The purpose was to raise public awareness of issues affecting security of retirement savings and to complement the enforcement program by providing workers with information to help them monitor their retirement savings.
PWBA’s aggressive public outreach activities have proven to be successful in providing workers with the tools they need to be the “eyes and ears” for the agency’s enforcement program.
For example, some of PWBA’s outreach efforts involving monitoring of plans by participants have especially benefited PWBA’s nationwide enforcement effort to protect savings held in contributory retirement plans, most notably 401(k)-type plans.
This program is a continuation of an initiative launched in FY 1996, and has resulted in over 2,478 investigations and over $33 million restored to these plans during FY 1997.
Overall, as a result of PWBA’s field enforcement efforts during FY 1997, monetary results to employee benefit plans (assets restored and prohibited transactions reversed) totaled approximately $363 million, with approximately $255 million achieved through voluntary compliance and $108 million through litigation.
During FY 1997, PWBA continued a number of other successful programs which were begun over the last few years.
The Delinquent Filer Voluntary Compliance Program (DFVCP) continues to encourage compliance with certain reporting and disclosure provisions of ERISA in exchange for reduced penalties.
During FY 1997, the agency received nearly 2,700 delinquent filings along with approximately $8.1 million in penalty payments associated with this program.
PWBA’s 502(c)(2) civil penalty administrative hearing program, begun as a two-year pilot in 1995, completed its first full year as an ongoing agency program.
The program better leverages DOL resources by assigning selected PWBA staff to represent the Department in routine civil penalty cases being heard before a Administrative Law Judge rather than referring these cases to the Office of the Solicitor.
The Unemployment Insurance (UI) program establishes the first economic line of defense for workers who lose their jobs through no fault of their own.
Authorized by the Social Security Act of 1935, UI was created as a means to alleviate personal hardship due to involuntary unemployment and to stabilize the economy.
The UI system is a unique Federal-State partnership based on Federal law, but executed through State law by State officials.
It is funded through employer taxes that are maintained in the Unemployment Trust Fund.
Basic benefits for unemployment compensation are financed by State taxes on employer payrolls, while benefit costs for ex-federal workers are reimbursed by Federal agencies.
The civil penalty assessment program was established in FY 1991 under provisions of ERISA Sections 502(c)(2), 502(l) and 502(i).
Collections of assessed penalties since that time, including interest and other charges, total nearly $72 million.
The Department will continue to pursue legislative action to bring to closure the long-standing issue regarding audits of employee benefit plans.
Both the GAO and OIG have identified the limited scope of the audit provision of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) as a major program issue.
In the judgment of the GAO and OIG, enactment of legislation to broaden the scope of certain pension plan audit requirements is needed.
A proposal was transmitted to the 105th Congress and introduced as H.R. 2290.
Hearings are scheduled on the bill in early FY 1998.
Program administration expenses are financed through the collection of Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) by the Internal Revenue Service.
During FY 1997, a total of $2.225 billion was provided to the State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs) for administration of the UI program.
Claimants for UI benefits are provided services by 53 SESAs through the operation of approximately 1,800 local UI claims offices.
These SESAs are responsible for both the payment of UI benefits and the collection of UI taxes from all liable/subject employers.
In FY 1997, the total unemployment rate averaged 5.1 percent while the insured unemployment rate averaged 2.0 percent.
It is estimated that about 118 million workers were covered by the UI program, of which 7.6 million workers received cash benefits during the year.
The 53 State agencies collected $22.2 billion in State UI taxes and reimbursable payments from 5.8 million liable subject employers, during FY 1997.
They paid out $20.6 billion in benefits under the Federal and State regular and extended benefits programs.
Benefits were paid to first time intrastate claims within 14 days 90.6 percent of the time.
On an accrual basis, State and Federal tax revenues and reimbursements totaled $27.2 billion in FY 1997.
Accrued benefit payments and other expenses totaled $24.3 billion during the same time period.
At the close of FY 1995, the restated Unemployment Trust Fund accrued balance was $48.7 billion.
In FY 1996, it increased by $5.3 to $54.0.
The FY 1997 ending balance of the UTF on a cash basis was $63.1 billion.
The Department has completed a major system development effort, correcting a long-standing audit issue.
ETA had historically relied on untimely cash and accrual information maintained by the U. S. Treasury to manage the UI program.
From 1992 to 1995, the Department worked closely with the U. S. Treasury to develop procedures to obtain timely data from Treasury’s general ledger.
From 1995 to 1997, the Department assisted Treasury in the design, development, and implementation of a new Treasury/UTF accounting system which records all cash activity directly from the states’ on-line request and payment systems.
The detailed cash transactions are electronically transferred each month to control accounts of the Department’s central accounting system (DOLARS) for matching with benefit payments and cost information provided by the states directly to Labor on the UIS on-line reporting system.
From 1994 to 1997, the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) assisted ETA/UIS in the design, development, and implementation of the Financial Management Reporting System (FMRS) to extract the financial cost data from the UIS/States on-line reporting system for electronic transfer to (DOLARS).
These individual systems in Treasury, the states, UIS, and DOLARS were successfully linked electronically in 1997, completing corrective actions on a major financial management problem.
Recommendations to establish an accounting system for the Federal Employment Compensation (FEC) Account within the Trust Fund were also made.
Management anticipates the integration of the FEC accounting system with the Department’s general ledger to be completed by the end of FY 1998.
An OIG audit identified the need to improve the internal controls of trust fund accounting and reporting activities carried out by the States.
This long-term project began in 1990.
ETA has facilitated SESAs’ efforts to improve their Unemployment Trust Fund (UTF) accounting systems by issuing guidance letters, providing technical assistance, and awarding direct funding for related automation grants, where applicable.
ETA also implemented a revised automated reporting system that fully considered the interrelationships of the UTF financial reports and the states’ accounting systems.
These actions closed this material weakness in the Unemployment Trust Fund operations.
OIG audits and ETA monitoring activities have discovered that existing UTF cash management needs improvement to optimize State Employment Security Agency (SESA) cash management systems and ensure maximum benefits for the Employment Security Program and the UTF.
To date, ETA and Treasury have jointly implemented a new on-line system for the drawdown of funds and developed Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA) regulations addressing the UTF.
The Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance program is provided to States for dislocated workers.
EDWAA funds are used to provide training and reemployment assistance to dislocated workers -- those losing jobs through plant closings and mass layoffs -- and unemployed individuals with little prospect of returning to their previous occupations.
It is estimated that approximately 537,803 dislocated workers were served in PY 1996 up from 523,810 in PY 1995.
ETA needs supporting data to document that DOL’s administrative charges to the UTF represent actual expenditures in accordance with the budget.
While the implementation of instructions issued by the OCFO began in FY 1997, completion of the corrective action plan is dependent on all agencies proper implementation.
Eighty percent of the appropriation under the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance (EDWAA) program is provided to States through formula-funded block grants.
The remainder of the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) provides job readjustment services, including skills and remedial training, job search, relocation assistance and income support to workers who lost their jobs because of increasing trade imports.
In FY 1997, $85.1 million was provided to the States.
The money was used to enroll an estimated 23,119 workers in classroom or on-the-job training, and to pay job search allowances and relocation allowances to an estimated 388 and 626 individuals, respectively.
An additional $27.8 million was provided for similar assistance under the North American Free Trade Agreement, primarily for classroom or on-the-job training, for an estimated 3,910 workers.
An OIG audit identified the need for the TAA program to adopt clearly stated and defined program goals, objectives, participant follow-up techniques, and related performance measures.
Data are needed to properly evaluate the program and meet GPRA reporting requirements.
ETA has published regulations providing guidance to the States for TAA eligible dislocated workers.
The regulations also provide criteria for waiving the training requirement to determine worker eligibility for supplemental income support.
ETA has also required its regional offices to review these practices in the states' programs.
ETA will develop a system to collect data necessary for comparison of results against program goals and objectives.
In FY 1997, the Department paid more than $2.5 billion in medical and wage-loss benefits to 300,000 workers who had been hurt or became ill on the job or to the survivors of those who died.
The Federal Employees' Compensation Act The Department administers three primary disability compensation programs that provide benefits to certain workers who experience work-related injury or disease, and survivors of employees who die from job-related injuries or diseases.
Compensation for most private-sector workers suffering job-related injuries is administered by state agencies.
FECA) affords income and medical-cost protection for job-related injuries, diseases or deaths of civilian employees of the Federal government and certain other groups.
Benefits are charged back to Federal employers, who pay from funds appropriated in their annual budgets or from operating revenues.
In FY 1997, FECA received 173,319 Federal employee injury reports, 2,000 fewer than in FY 1996.
Of this number, most were adjudicated in a timely manner—94.4 percent of traumatic injuries within 45 days, and 90.2 percent of the nontraumatic injury cases within 180 days—an improvement over FY 1996 when adjudications were 92.9 percent and 85.8 percent, respectively.
In FY 1997, the FECA program continued the Periodic Roll Management Project (PRM) which was aimed at quality management of the disability roll, improvement in service to long-term disabled beneficiaries, rehabilitation and reemployment of the partially disabled and adjustment of benefits to accurately reflect eligibility.
In FY 1997, PRM project teams in four district offices screened another 3,900 long-term cases, bringing the total count of cases screened since April 1992 to over 40,000.
By the end of FY 1997, 30 percent of those cases had benefits adjusted or terminated.
Continuing cumulative savings from these actions compounded over the five-year period totaled $246 million.
In response to OIG financial statement audit findings, ESA has modified the FECA actuarial liability model and is in the process of documenting the model and adopting a formal review system to validate results.
The OIG audit also noted that improvements could be made to the FECA Bill Payment System at the district office level to ensure that medical bills are keyed correctly, that bypass codes are being properly utilized, and that procedure code modifiers are being entered properly.
Also, improvements are scheduled to ensure that medical bills receive adequate review prior to payment.
ESA has requested funding in FY 1999 to make these and other processing improvements and effect considerable savings in the FECA program.
The OIG has noted that improvements could be made in obtaining earnings statements from the Social Security Administration and recommended that ESA continue to pursue a periodic automated case match with the Social Security Administration.
The audit also identified the need for timely posting of data in the system used to account for billings to other Federal agencies for Federal Workers Compensation benefits paid by DOL on their behalf.
A corrective action plan has significantly decreased this timing variance.
A FECA policy to effectively monitor monthly reporting also needs to be developed.
The Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act provides medical benefits, compensation for lost-wages and rehabilitation services for job related injuries, diseases or death of private-sector workers in certain maritime and related employment.
Benefits are paid directly from private funds by an authorized self-insured employer or through an authorized insurance carrier.
In certain cases, benefits are paid from a special fund composed primarily of employer contributions and administered by the Department.
In FY 1997, about 91,000 maritime workers or their survivors received benefits from employers.
This measure requires that newly filed and refiled claims for benefits be adjudicated, and initial findings issued, within 180 days of receipt of the claim.
For advances after 1981, the average rate should be based only on obligations whose remaining period to maturity is comparable to the anticipated maturity for the Black Lung advances.
The OIG noted that interest rates used both before and after the 1981 amendments were based on the rate charged for 15-year obligations.
The interest rate for post-1981 advances should have been limited to those obligations with comparable maturity periods, which the OIG believes to be 30-year obligations since the program will not be in a position to repay the loans in less than 30 years.
ESA disagrees with the OIG position and plans no further action since the issue is limited to determining the appropriate methods of intergovernmental transfers between the General Fund and the Trust Fund--a function performed by the Department of the Treasury.
An OIG audit noted that several assumptions used by the Black Lung actuarial model had not been updated recently or should otherwise be reviewed to determine if changes are necessary.
ESA has agreed to review and revise elements of the actuarial model including age distribution, new entrant assumptions, and mortality table updates.
The Wage and Hour Division administers and enforces a wide range of laws that collectively cover virtually all private, state and local government employment.
In FY 1997, Wage and Hour conducted 35,940 compliance actions under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and 1,622 Government Contract actions.
The number of compliance actions completed in FY 1997 is, for the most part, less than in FY 1996 on an Act by Act basis.
However, Wage and Hour has increased education/outreach efforts which contributes significantly to voluntary compliance.
Wage and Hour's strategic plan includes efforts to measure the impact of both direct enforcement (compliance actions) and education/outreach on rates of compliance in particular industries or industry sectors.
Employers agreed to pay 78.9 percent of the monetary findings under the FLSA and government contract programs in FY 1997.
While this rate is less than last year (the recovery rate of 83.1 percent in FY 1996 was the highest since FY 1991), it compares favorably with recovery rates over the previous four years.
For example, the recovery rate has fluctuated from 76.5 percent in FY 1993, to 81.4 percent in 1994, and to 79.1 percent in FY 1995.
Agreements to pay totaled $96.7 million compared to $122.6 million in monetary findings.
OIG financial statement audits previously noted that the Wage and Hour Division (WHD) did not maintain sufficient control over information recorded in the back wage subsidiary system (Back Wage Collection and Disbursement System, BCDS), and that certain policies and practices exercised by the regional offices precluded the use of this system as a reliable subsidiary for back wages.
The OIG audit found that BCDS transactions were not recorded accurately, timely and were not complete.
Of the 299 case files selected for testing, 119 (or 39 percent) were either misstated, or the validity of the case could not be determined.
In OIG's FY 1997 audit, additional recommendations were made pertaining to the need for WHD to reconcile cash activity recorded in the general ledger with that recorded in the BCDS subsidiary system; however, back wage cash activity remained unreconciled in FY 1997 and the problems noted in previous years continued to exist.
Under the provisions of various labor standards laws, back wages are determined and collected by ESA for remittance to the affected employees or, if the employees cannot be located, to the U.S. Treasury.
Back wages collected are held in a special deposit account for a period of time prescribed by law, after which they revert to Treasury.
Although WHD has revised its policies on the period of time before reverting funds to Treasury, as of September 30, 1997, there was approximately $4.3 million on deposit that had not been distributed to employees (primarily from the San Francisco and Philadelphia regions), and should have reverted to the U.S. Treasury A FY 1993 audit recommended that WHD install a CMP tracking system which would function as a subsidiary for CMP activities and receivable balances.
A new CMP system was substantially installed in FY 1997, closing a major finding, but WHD has not yet completed the system reports or general ledger interface with the Department's central accounting system.
The most recent audit of the new system detected misstatements in the CMP accounts receivable balances, caused primarily by incorrect or incomplete data entry.
This included cases where contested CMPs were incorrectly recorded as accounts receivable.
Of the 159 cases selected for testing, 94 (or 59 percent) had one or more errors.
Beginning balances were not correctly recorded in the new system, and many cases with beginning balances were not reviewed to determine the amount, if any, which represented a valid CMP receivable.
Consequently, receivables which existed in the prior year were not sufficiently accounted for when the new system was implemented.
ESA is developing estimates for capitalization of this system.
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) administers and enforces provisions of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (LMRDA), as amended and related laws which protect union democracy, financial integrity, and certain rights of union members.
Through its Statutory Programs unit, OLMS also administers the employee protection provisions of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act and the Airline Deregulation Act's Airline Rehire Program.
In administering the LMRDA program, OLMS has three primary statutory-based goals: (1) to ensure that the reports required of unions and others under the law are available for public disclosure; (2) to resolve union member complaints concerning union officer elections and other matters pertaining to safeguards for union democracy, as required by the law; and (3) to protect union financial integrity by enforcing safeguards established in the law.
To ensure that the required protections were in place in FY 1997, Statutory Programs completed a total of 942 urban transit program certification actions, 90 percent of which were completed within 60 days of referral, and 500 rural transit program certification actions.
The office also processed 201 claims submitted by individuals and/or unions alleging violation of the terms and conditions of employee protections certified by the agency.
The number of urban transit program certifications, 942, is significantly lower than the 1,200 reported in FY 1996.
This difference in number does not represent a drop in workload but a variance in the way the certification actions were counted.
The Division is currently reviewing methodology used to compute these numbers to achieve a standardized reporting of results for the future.
The way in which the certifications were counted also applies to the number of claims processed from 73 in FY 1996 to 201 in FY 1997.
In addition, staff of the Statutory Programs unit responded to approximately 100 program inquiries in connection with the Airline Rehire Program established pursuant to the Airline Deregulation Act.
The Office of Administrative Law Judges conducts hearings under more than 80 separate statutes and Executive Orders, contributing to each of the Secretary's three strategic goals.
Hearings are required to be conducted in accordance with the Administrative Procedures Act, which requires the application of the principles of due process similar to civil cases heard in federal or state courts.
Objectives are established along with appropriate case disposition goals in the budget process in each of the program areas.
In addition to adjudicatory responsibilities in the Black Lung and Longshore programs, the OALJ also performs this function in Traditional and Immigration programs.
The Traditional Program involves a wide variety of cases that fall within the Department's jurisdiction.
Traditional cases include grant cases under the Job Training and Partnership Act; enforcement and debarment proceedings in Davis-Bacon and Service Contract Act cases; compliance enforcement in Fair Labor Standards Act cases; restitution and remuneration in Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) cases involving allegations of discrimination based on race, sex or handicap status; whistleblower cases under the Energy Reorganization Act, other environmental statutes, and the Surface Transportation Act; and a wide variety of other issues.
The Immigration Program involves the appeals by employers of denials of labor certification of aliens to work in specific jobs within the United States for which a qualified U.S. citizen cannot be found.
Performance goals for the OALJ are measured by the number of case disposition achieved per program as established at the beginning of each fiscal year.
For FY 1997, OALJ's goal was 6,762 cases; 7,243 were achieved.
In addition to case management, OALJ has made improvements in other aspects of its operation.
Materials for the OALJ home page on the Internet have been increased to over 12,000 total documents.
The OALJ home page is a first class product that is of great benefit to people who need to learn about OALJ processes or do research in the case areas described above.
OALJ has issued an updated version of the Black Lung Desk Book which is widely utilized by the practicing bar.
Finally, the use of an alternative dispute resolution (ADR) program continues to expand and be accepted by the parties to OALJ cases.
The Benefits Review Board (BRB) reviews and decides appeals which raise substantial questions of law or fact from OALJ decisions.
The cases involve claims for compensation filed pursuant to the provisions of the Black Lung Benefits Act and the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and its extensions.
The Board also receives a small percentage of appeals under these Acts directly from the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP).
The workload of the Board is divided into two categories - Black Lung and Longshore.
The Board began FY 1997 with 1,012 pending Black Lung appeals and 399 pending Longshore appeals.
At the end of FY 1997 there were 1,189 pending Black Lung appeals and 348 pending Longshore appeals.
The Board established performance measures for the first time for FY 1997.
The primary goal was to issue dispositions in both of its jurisdictional areas, on average, within 12 months of an appeal being filed with the Board.
The actual average time for dispositions of 1,232 Black Lung appeals was 11.31 months; for Longshore appeals, 10.95 months for 539 dispositions.
The Board ended the Fiscal Year with no backlogs of work.
The Board also issued 10,523 non-final orders, disposed of 696 petitions for attorney fees, and decided 372 motions for reconsideration during FY 1997.
In addition, the Board responded to 3,023 inquiries from parties to appeals and/or individual Congressmen or Senators.
The Board also completed a physical move to the Department of Labor headquarters building during FY 1997.
The OIG worked to achieve its goal to help workers and retirees by safeguarding workplace employment, unemployment, and disability benefits and enhancing DOL's effectiveness in administering related programs.
For example, the OIG identified $ 73 million of unreported real property in SESA real property and questioned $8.2 million in related costs.
The OIG also continued to identify and investigate fraud against the UI program through the fictitious employer or other fraudulent schemes.
In the pension benefits area, the OIG recommended that PWBA enforce reporting and disclosure requirements for Direct Filing Entities.
In the FECA disability compensation program, a potential loss of $7 million was identified because of improper payments to medical providers.
Through its labor racketeering program, the OIG continues to work to achieve its goal of reducing the influence of organized crime and labor racketeering in unions and the workplace.
In FY 1997, the OIG continued to identify, target and investigate investment brokers and plan administrators who have ties to organized crime and who abuse or defraud union pension funds.
The OIG also continued efforts to remove associates of organized crime from some of the Nation’s largest labor unions by using the RICO statute.
The OIG has worked very closely with court-appointed monitors in these RICO cases to remove corrupt officials from unions and help restore democratic representation for their membership.
A vital part of the Department’s mission is to ensure all Americans a safe, healthy, and equal opportunity workplace.
Common sense and business necessities provide strong incentives for creating and maintaining such a workplace environment, but these incentives are not always sufficient.
The Department has an important role to play in protecting workers and promoting equal opportunity workplaces.
If an employer’s practices threaten workers’ safety and health, discriminate against women, minorities, veterans, or people with disabilities, or deprive workers of fair wages, tough enforcement is necessary.
The ultimate goal is compliance with employment laws.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is responsible for enforcing the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596).
The OSH Act authorizes the agency to enforce safety and health standards through inspections of workplaces, and also to foster voluntary compliance by employers through onsite consultation, training, education and information services, partnerships, and Voluntary Protection Programs.
The OSHA program is administered by the National Office, 10 regional offices, and 93 area offices.
OSHA also makes fifty percent matching grants to assist 25 states in administering and enforcing safety and health standards under approved state programs.
The agency covers more than 100 million workers at more than six and a half million workplaces.
During FY 1997, OSHA conducted 34,264 Federal enforcement inspections, an increase of approximately 43 percent from the FY 1996 total.
This reflects the full year funding availability in FY 1997 as compared to the FY 1996 uncertainty and government shutdown.
State plan personnel conducted 56,623 worksite inspections, a decrease of 1.0 percent.
Both programs have been shifting emphasis from regulation to results by offering incentives to employers who choose partnership with OSHA through the implementation of effective safety and health programs.
Traditional enforcement continued for employers who elected not to partner with the agency.
During FY 1997, OSHA added debt collection management to its central financial management office.
This has In FY 1997, OSHA continued to implement a data initiative, which will enable the agency to collect establishment/site specific injury and illness data as well as information on injury and illness characteristics.
This system will greatly improve OSHA’s ability to measure injury, illness and fatality rates, to target agency interventions to the most hazardous work sites, and to measure program outcomes as required by GPRA.
The data initiative includes a program to monitor the quality of employers’ injury and illness records.
These efforts are fully responsive to OIG audit recommendations.
The new measures derive from OSHA’s strategic plan, and focus on three major goals: reducing workplace injuries, illnesses facilitated the implementation of the Debt Collection Act of 1996 requirements and has assisted in improving OSHA's penalty collection process.
OSHA collects the majority of its penalties within the first year, with additional collections occurring in subsequent years.
Through September 30, 1997, OSHA had collected 57.6 percent of FY 1997 penalties, 84.1 percent of FY 1996 penalties, and 89.1 percent of FY 1995 penalties.
OSHA's reform efforts include a streamlining of its rulemaking activities.
This strategy involves identifying clear priorities, focusing on key building block rules, rewriting standards in plain English, eliminating outdated standards, and emphasizing business-labor partnerships.
In FY 1997, final standards were promulgated for: longshoring, 1,3-butadiene, abatement verification, and methylene chloride.
A proposal was published for tuberculosis.
OSHA continued stringent enforcement efforts against employers who willfully neglected the safety and health of their employees.
The number of cases designated as egregious or involving significant penalties (over $100,000) rose again, from 165 in FY 1996 to 226 in FY 1997.
The Federal program completed 2,651 investigations of complaints filed under sections 11(c), 405, and several other statutes for which OSHA has been assigned responsibility, alleging discriminatory actions against employees for exercising rights afforded them by the Act.
State programs completed 1,454 discrimination investigations during FY 1997.
Consistent with its partnership initiatives, OSHA continued to explore ways to encourage cooperation between workers and employers and to promote voluntary compliance programs.
The agency funds 90 percent of the costs incurred by designated agencies to provide free onsite consultation to small businesses that request assistance in achieving voluntary compliance.
Under this program, 24,785 initial consultation visits were completed in FY 1997.
OSHA also funded 23 Susan Harwood Training Grants.
Through its Voluntary Protection Program, OSHA grants special recognition to companies that have exemplary safety and health programs.
The number of work sites participating in this program reached 391 in FY 1997, with 337 Federal and 54 State Plan State sites.
The OSHA Training Institute in Des Plaines, Illinois emphasized the training needs of Federal and state compliance officers, and reflected newly promulgated standards.
Twelve educational institutions functioned as OSHA Training Institute Education Centers to provide OSHA courses for the private sector.
In conjunction with the Department's Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB), OSHA continued its cooperative activities in universal worker protection under the Memorandum of Understanding with Mexico, and with other international counterpart agencies, particularly in Eastern Europe.
When the contractor for a local sewer project in Lehigh Township, Pennsylvania, failed to protect its own employees from working in unsafe trenches and a potential cave in, several residents decided to call the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
Inspectors visited the site and told the contractor to enlarge the trench and protect the workers with a trench box.
After the contractor ignored the warning, OSHA inspectors revisited the site several times.
When it was clear that the contractor was not going to protect its workers, OSHA took enforcement action against the company.
Over 200 townspeople met to hear OSHA explain the citations it had issued and to watch as five residents received certificates of appreciation from the agency.
Residents cheered and gave Labor Department officials a standing ovation for their work.
One citizen commented, "You should be proud to work for an agency that listens to people."
Another said, "You not only listened to us; you did something about it."
The Mine Safety and Health Administration mission is to achieve the purpose of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977: making the first priority and concern of all in the mining industry the health and safety of its most precious resource—the miner.
All of MSHA's resources are dedicated to ensuring that each of the approximately 322,000 men and women who work in over 13,800 American mines will go to their jobs secure in the knowledge that they will not have to place themselves at risk of loss of life or limb to make a living.
MSHA works in partnership with the American mining community to eliminate fatalities, reduce the frequency and severity of accidents, and minimize health hazards associated with the mining industry.
The Mine Act requires MSHA to inspect every underground mine four times each year and all surface mines two times each year to determine compliance with federal safety and health standards.
In carrying out other legislative mandates contained in the Mine Act, MSHA also: (1) conducts additional inspections of gassy mines; (2) conducts spot inspections of mines with particularly hazardous conditions; (3) investigates mining accidents; (4) investigates and refers acts of criminal wrongdoing to the Department of Justice for prosecution; (5) investigates discrimination complaints; (6) assesses and collects civil penalties; (7) provides education and training assistance; (8) tests mining equipment for safety; (9) compiles and analyzes accident and injury data; (10) provides technical assistance to the mining industry; (11) promulgates mandatory safety and health standards and (12) manages State Grants program.
This country's miners are the most productive in the world and supply both U.S. industries and overseas markets with high-grade coal, metal and nonmetal products.
Yet along with this high productivity, and in spite of past efforts, the 322,000 men and women who work daily in the mining industry face safety and health hazards at levels unknown in most other professions.
Each year approximately 100 miners die in job-related accidents and another 10,000 are seriously injured.
One miner dies for every five million hours worked.
Mine roof falls have been one of the major causes of accidental mining deaths.
In recent years, the number of roof fall deaths has been declining; however, four accidental roof fall mining deaths in a twelve-hour period caused MSHA to undertake a special program of increased safety measures.
Nearly 700 mine inspectors were dispatched to every underground coal mine in the Nation to review specific safeguards and actions that could be taken to prevent these deadly accidents.
Industry and labor associations and state agencies joined in the effort to alert the mining community and to take steps to prevent further occurrences.
10) since 1987.
This compared to 34 during the same period in the prior year.
In response, MSHA embarked on a special two-week National Fatality Reduction Sweep in September 1997.
Inspectors visited 9,006 mines and 108,454 miners to bring attention to the increased number of accidental deaths in metal and nonmetal mines.
In addition to its "safety sweeps," MSHA's FY 1997 safety-related efforts included its mandated inspection program, safety alerts, special focus education and training programs, and technical support programs.
In the coal program in FY 1997, 96% of all mandated inspections were completed; the remaining were delayed into the first two weeks of FY 1998 because of the assistance provided to the metal and nonmetal National Fatality Reduction Sweep.
In the metal and nonmetal program, the mandated inspection completion rate was 84%.
This inspection shortfall was a result of the dedication of resources to the National Fatality Reduction Sweep and surface haulage initiative, as well as the attrition rate of metal and nonmetal inspectors.
MSHA supported and participated in the Department of Labor's National Campaign to Eliminate Silicosis, which was launched jointly with the American Lung Association, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, and the OSHA.
As a follow-up, MSHA's Coal, Metal and Nonmetal, and Educational Policy and Development organizations developed informational materials and sponsored silicosis awareness and prevention seminars throughout the country.
MSHA reemphasized its inspection focus on lung hazards in coal mines by strengthening existing enforcement procedures to give coal miners better protection against lung diseases caused by respirable dust.
MSHA inspectors' new instructions are to: provide protection for contractor employees and construction workers at mine sites with regard to dust control plans, training, hazard surveillance and compliance activities; inspect for compliance with ventilation regulations that require operators of underground coal mines to perform on-shift examinations of respirable dust controls; place increased emphasis on examination of dust controls where 100 micrograms or more of quartz (crystalline silica) is present in respirable coal mine dust samples; and place increased inspector emphasis on examining dust controls on roof bolting machines and of machine-mounted dust collectors on continuous mining machines.
To help apprise the mining community of the procedures, copies of the MSHA Procedure Instruction Letters were mailed to all coal mine operators and were posted to the MSHA Home Page on the World Wide Web.
As part of this effort, MSHA implemented three pilot programs to extend respirable coal dust sampling by inspectors to four times a year at underground coal mines and twice a year at surface coal mines.
Diesel engines are widely used to power equipment in the mining industry, from very small to very large machinery.
While most of the existing fleet is at surface mines, there is increasing use of diesel engines underground.
There has been growing concern that the tiny particulate matter contained in diesel exhaust may lead to health problems for miners and work continues on the development of a new regulation for diesel particulates.
A draft publication, “Practical Ways to Control Exposure to Diesel Exhaust in Mining—A Toolbox,” is a product of input from the mining community and describes the experiences of miners, mine operators and diesel equipment manufacturers in seeking to control emissions.
It is organized as a “tool-box” so that it can be put to use directly by those working with diesel-powered equipment.
Hearing loss due to extreme noise levels is preventable.
In the coal industry, regulation allows use of hearing protection.
This is not the case in the metal and nonmetal program, where engineering controls are required.
MSHA is revising its existing noise exposure standards based on the metal and nonmetal requirements.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs carries out the Secretary of Labor’s international responsibilities, develops Departmental policy and programs relating to international labor activities, and coordinates Departmental international activities involving other U.S. government agencies, intergovernmental organizations, and nongovernmental organizations.
ILAB coordinates U.S. government participation in international forums dealing with labor issues, operates technical assistance programs, publishes reports on international labor issues, represents the interests of American workers in interagency policy reviews, and assists in the formulation and implementation of international treaties dealing with labor issues.
During FY 1997, ILAB ensured that U.S. government priorities were reflected in employment agendas of international organizations by (1) conducting an exchange program with the European Union to discuss experiences in employment and training; and (2) participating in the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) working group on Human Resource Development to establish an initiative on worker health and safety and productivity.
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Labor Ministerial (October 14-15).
In seeking to place the welfare to work issue on the agenda of international organizations, ILAB participated in preparatory meetings for the G-8 Ministerial conference on employment held in the United Kingdom in February 1998.
ILAB continued to actively promote the observance and monitoring of core labor standards by negotiating a declaration concerning core labor standards and an effective follow-up mechanism to measure a country's adherence to those standards.
As a result, the International Labor Organization (ILO) agreed to place discussion of a new Convention on the abolition of extreme forms of child labor on the agenda of its 1998 conference.
In February, 1997, ILAB brokered a ground-breaking agreement between Pakistani soccer ball manufacturers, the ILO and UNICEF to provide over 7,000 children with an education in place of stitching soccer balls.
ILAB's funding also helped create programs in Thailand and Nepal to prevent children from being lured into exploitative child labor and prostitution.
ILAB continued implementation of the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation by reviewing submissions/ complaints by labor and women in the workplace, and by promoting OSH week.
ILAB continued to support U.S. government foreign policy objectives by providing labor-market technical assistance in Central Europe, the Middle East, Latin America and Africa.
In particular, ILAB has initiated a technical assistance programs in the labor ministries of South Africa and Paraguay.
The mission of the President's Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities is to communicate, coordinate and promote public and private efforts to enhance the employment of people with disabilities.
The Committee provides information, training, and technical assistance in support of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to America's business leaders, organized labor, rehabilitation and service providers, advocacy organizations, families and individuals with disabilities.
The major goal of the President's Committee is to provide leadership in the effort to eliminate employment barriers to people with physical, mental and communications disabilities.
The Committee takes the lead in uniting people and resources to turn possibilities for work into actualities for employment.
The Committee's paradigm for this leadership is partnership - active cooperation, coordination and promotion of public and private efforts to eliminate barriers and create opportunities to benefit both individuals and businesses.
Job Accommodation Network (JAN) - JAN is a toll-free telephone and on-line bulletin board service that provides information about accommodations for employees with disabilities.
In FY 1997, JAN answered over 40,000 calls, resulting in the hiring or retention of approximately 22,000 workers with disabilities.
Workforce Recruitment Program - The President's Committee, in cooperation with the Department of Defense, coordinated the recruitment for paid summer internships for college students with disabilities.
The Committee expanded this program to include employment opportunities in the private sector.
The President's Committee profiled 1,162 students and circulated their resumes to hundreds of managers and supervisors who hired 221 of them.
This hiring rate is a 46% increase over FY 1996.
National Employment Conference - The 1997 National Employment Conference attracted approximately 1,500 attendees and featured an exhibit hall with 85 vendors displaying state-of-the-art products and services.
An employment fair for people with disabilities was held concurrently, attracting 800 job seekers and 70 recruiters representing 38 companies.
National Business Leadership Network (BLN) - The BLN is a partnership of employers nationwide who are committed to interviewing and hiring qualified job applicants with disabilities.
The program aims to stimulate best disability employment practice.
The BLN is being led by Thomas Donohue, President and CEO of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce High School/High Tech (HS/HT) Project - This project gives students with disabilities opportunities to explore careers in technology related occupations.
The Committee supports 19 HS/HT sites which provide services to 1050 students interested in high tech career fields.
National Disability Employment Awareness Month (NDEAM) Project - The theme for the 1997 National Disability Employment Awareness Month was "Ability - Bridge to the Future."
Thirty-five thousand kits were produced and distributed throughout the United States and beyond.
Cultural Diversity Initiative - The President's Committee has partnered with various organizations such as the NAACP, Urban League and ASPIRA to develop strategies to reduce the high unemployment rate of minorities with disabilities.
Kweisi Mfume, President and CEO of the NAACP created an Advisory Group on Disability and sent a memorandum to the 2,200 branches directing them to advocate for the full employment and civil rights of African-Americans with Disabilities.
Federal Contract Compliance Programs (ESA) The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) enforces regulations which require Federal contractors to take affirmative action to ensure equal employment opportunity, to eliminate discrimination from the workplace and to obtain redress for victims of discrimination.
In FY 1997, 3,750 compliance reviews of Federal contractors were completed and 372 complaints were investigated and resolved.
A total of $30.8 million in financial agreements was obtained, including back wage agreements of $10.7 million for 4,435 workers.
The number of workers in facilities reviewed was 1.56 million.
In comparison to FY 1996, the foregoing represents a slight increase in compliance review activity, and a slight drop in the number of complaints.
Additional staff has helped OFCCP to increase the number of compliance reviews.
OFCCP's performance goal/objective in the program's Strategic Plan is "to increase by 30% the number of Federal contractors brought into compliance with the various laws and the Executive Order dealing with Federal contract compliance by FY 2002".
The strategic goal has been supported during FY 1997 by several actions including: (1) Promulgating revised 41 CFR 60-1 regulations, giving OFCCP the flexibility to perform a range of compliance options; (2) Drafting revised regulations at 41 CFR 60-2, which will help reduce the paperwork burden on Federal contractors; (3) Entering into Memoranda of Understanding (MOU's) with the U.S. Department of Justice's Office of Special Counsel and with the Veterans' Employment and Training Service, for the purposes of sharing information and promoting equal employment opportunity; and (4) Drafting revisions to the selection process wherein Federal contractors are selected for evaluation.
In FY 1997, OFCCP continued its promotion of best practices in affirmative In the above chart, "Compliance" refers to compliance reviews of Federal Contractors conducted by OFCCP.
Complaint" refers to complaint investigations handled by OFCCP.
An "Aged" review is a compliance review over 240 days old, or a complaint investigation over 180 days old.
Approximately 91 percent of OFCCP actions are compliance reviews, the remaining 9 percent are complaint investigations.
The Women’s Bureau is the only Federal agency with primary responsibility for serving and promoting the interests of working women.
The Bureau participates in the development of Federal, State and local policies and programs to benefit working women; conducts research, reviews legislation, formulates outreach programs that contribute to the development and implementation of public policy; and provides specific support and technical assistance to various targeted groups.
In FY 1997, the WB, in partnership with other DOL agencies, held a historical national Working Women’s Summit under the theme of “Economic Equity: Realities, Responsibilities and Rewards.”
The Summit was attended by approximately 20,000 participants at 450 downlink sites across the nation, and viewers of the satellite broadcast via cable and television networks.
Also, the Summit brought together experts, local elected officials, advocates, practitioners and working women (and women who want to work), to discuss topics such as the future of work, life long learning, downsizing, pensions, fair pay, workplace flexibility, child care, the glass ceiling, microenterprise, transferability of military skills, and safety and health in the workplace.
The purpose of these discussions was to begin a dialogue to identify the solutions to concerns that continue to plague women on the job.
The WB co-administered with the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training the fourth year of the Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations (WANTO) program, which makes grants to community-based organizations for providing technical assistance to employers and labor organizations to encourage the employment of women in apprenticeship and nontraditional occupations.
Grants totaling $610,000 were awarded, and technical assistance was provided to more than 200 employers and labor organizations.
As a follow-up to the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women, the WB co-authored the *President's Interagency Council on Women of America's commitment: Federal Programs Benefiting Women and the new Initiatives*; and, based on 500 submissions from women to the President's Interagency Council on Women and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) around the country co-authored *Building on Beijing: United States NGOs Shape a Women's National Action Agenda*.
In partnership with ETA, the WB promoted the Work Opportunity Tax Credit to women, including welfare to work recipients, through the publication of a brochure insert entitled *A Woman-Friendly Benefit*.
Approximately 40,000 copies were distributed in print and electronically.
Finally, in FY 1997, the WB completed the last phase of the Working Women Count Honor Roll Program with the release of a final publication.
This publication entitled: "What Works!: The Working Women Count Honor Roll Report," highlights employer models who, through their policies and programs, have made positive change in the lives of more than 2 million working women and their families, demonstrating that partnership initiatives and executive commitment work for working women and men.
In addition to the initiatives above, the WB responded to over 11,000 callers to its Work and Family and Fair Pay Clearinghouses; established an Internet site that received approximately 144,000 hits; distributed over 700,000 copies of its publications; and provided information through appearances on television networks, radio, cable and newspaper/newsletter articles on key workforce issues such as women's rights, job opportunities and training, welfare reform and pay equity to over 35,000,000 constituents nationwide.
Also, the WB conducted and co-sponsored more than 200 conferences pertaining to women and work, i.e., employment rights (Don't Work in the Dark); pension rights and benefits; nontraditional employment; and balancing work and family.
The OIG worked to achieve its goal of optimizing the use of funds appropriated for workplace safety, health, and standards programs by enhancing program performance and accountability.
For example, in FY 1997 the OIG identified certain weaknesses in the protections afforded to whistle blowers under the Occupational Safety and Health Act and made recommendations to ensure such protections.
Inaccuracies in the data used by ESA to determine the Davis-Bacon prevailing wages were also identified.
To maximize the overall achievement of the Secretary’s three strategic goals, the Department established an overarching goal to effectively link strategic planning, resource allocation, and on-going operational activities with program strategies.
This process is supported by work in the Office of Inspector General, the Office of the Chief Financial Officer and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management.
These offices, in conjunction with program agencies of the Department, developed strategic and performance plans in FY 1997.
Performance against the management goals and measures established for FY 1999 and beyond in those plans will be the subject of future accountability reports.
In the interim, reporting under various financial management and related statutes will be the primary focus of this section of the Accountability Report.
The OIG noted in its audit opinion that the Department made substantial progress in FY 1997 to close out six longstanding material weaknesses and system non-conformances reported in prior years.
In total, twenty-eight prior year recommendations have been closed.
Many of these recommendation and corrective actions cover items reported in prior year reports under the FMFIA.
The Department’s corrective action plans on outstanding FMFIA issues are discussed in the program and management sections of this report within the Secretary’s Goals.
Table I lists open OIG issues, and a page reference for the discussion in this report.
A Table of closed material weaknesses may be found in the Appendix.
The Department has 61 mission critical systems that must be brought into Year 2000 compliance by March, 1999.
DOL is ahead of its planned schedule for implementation progress to eliminate these problems.
Given the critical nature of the Year 2000 work, this report is providing the most current information (beyond FY 1997).
The number of systems already compliant has increased from 10 to 13, a 30 percent increase from November, 1997 through February, 1998.
The Department is managing this conversion of the 61 mission-critical systems through a four stage process.
Completion rates for each stage are as of March, 1998.
The number of mission critical systems becoming Year 2000 compliant has increased from 16% to 21% between November, 1997 and February, 1998.
DOL management has demanded that federal programming and contractor staff establish and follow aggressive schedules to convert and test all applications and systems.
The Chief Information Officer continues to work closely with the agencies to further identify and resolve potential problems relating to the Year 2000.
As a result agencies have taken action to meet the new target and to assure that all DOL mission critical systems are ready for the Year 2000.
The Department has 80 non-mission critical systems of which 56 are already compliant, 11 are being replaced, 12 are being repaired, and 1 is being retired.
The Department met the OMB February 1998 goal of inventorying its 3,130 data exchanges with States, Federal agencies, and private sector organizations.
In addition, the Department exceeded the OMB March 1998 goal for contacting data exchange partners having made at least initial contact with all exchange partners.
The CIO has developed a Year 2000 contingency policy.
The policy requires that agencies submit contingency plans for the following category of mission critical systems: (1) all benefit and payment systems, and (2) any systems for which scheduled dates have slipped substantially.
Contingency plans are scheduled to be submitted by July 1998.
The CIO is monitoring all critical DOL interfaces with the States for Year 2000 compliance.
Responsibility for meeting with the State agencies, to ensure agency data exchanges are compatible and Year 2000 compliant, found several instances where security clearances had not been performed on personnel considered as critical users within the DOLAR$ system.
There are no standardized, written procedures to control input into DOLAR$--the Department's central accounting system.
A DOLAR$ user entering invoice data can create a payee vendor record in the vendor master file without automatic review.
Name and address information can be changed by accounting technicians.
The only input verification which can be performed is a review of the input document; however, there is no requirement for this review.
The risk of unauthorized payments to vendors or the input of erroneous data is possible without adequate controls.
In a FY 1995 audit, the OIG recommended that action be taken to ensure that written disaster recovery plans be developed.
However, not all agencies have developed such plans.
ETA's Office of Information Resources Management (OIRM) and the Unemployment Insurance Service (UIS) still have not developed written disaster recovery plans.
Also, FECA does not have an adequate plan in place.
The FY 1997 audit revealed additional problems in this area.
Recent changes in Black Lung Programs have not been tested as a part of the disaster recovery plan.
Also, Job Corps' plan did not include backup provisions, nor instructions for restoring the operational system or procedures for moving operations to an off-site location.
The OIG identified an EDP system under development in ESA that was not recorded in the Department's property system.
The Department agreed to provide guidance and technical assistance to agencies concerning identifying capitalized costs associated with EDP system's development.
ESA is currently reconstructing system development costs for inclusion in the Department's property system.
These EDP audit findings are being addressed in the audit follow-up on the FY 1997 Consolidated Financial Statement Audit.
The Act requires the OIG financial statement audit to evaluate DOL systems for compliance with the Act's standards.
3) the United States Standard General Ledger at the transaction level.
To meet this audit requirement, the OIG performed tests of compliance using the implementation guidance for FFMIA issued by OMB in September, 1997.
The OIG audit did not identify any compliance issues with the Department's core accounting system; however, the results of OIG tests disclosed instances where certain DOL subsidiary financial management systems did not comply with one or more of the three requirements of the Act.
Noncompliance issues include: complete, timely, reliable and consistent information is not provided; financial information is not processed effectively and efficiently; a complete and adequate audit trail is not provided; and transaction detail supporting SGL accounts is not readily available.
The bulk of the Department's debt results from Civil Monetary Penalties assessed by several of our program agencies.
DOL has made good progress in moving toward compliance with the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996.
Program agencies have been actively referring debts to the Department of the Treasury, having forwarded almost 50% of all debts eligible to be cross-serviced.
We anticipate the remaining debts to be forwarded to Treasury (or written off) during FY 1998.
Table IV identifies the key debt information recently provided to the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee.
Both CFO staff and program agency staff are actively involved in FMS interagency committees on various aspects of DCIA.
Procedures are established so that cases files are maintained on a current basis and all debt management activity is clearly documented and readily available for examination.
ETA Debt Management activities are not integrated with the general ledger.
The debt management function has several deficiencies: timely maintenance of subsidiary records and posting to the general ledger; controls over the receiving, logging, processing, and depositing of debt collection checks; and documentation of writeoffs and collection efforts.
In FY 1998, ETA will begin using the departmental accounts receivable subsystem.
This change and improved data interchanges between ETA’s Grant and Contract Management Information System and the Department’s central accounting system will address these problems.
The OIG audit noted that the ESA’s OWCP debt management system included inaccurate accounts receivable balances due to errors in recording overpayments and assessment of interest and other posting errors.
In the FY 1996 audit, the OIG noted the need for guidance to the agencies on the proper identification, accounting, collection, and reporting for accounts receivable.
Weaknesses still exist in accounts receivable for back wage and civil monetary penalties, and the receivable balance for OWCP is still misstated.
Guidance, in the form of a policy memorandum, is expected to be issued in the near future.
Monetary Penalties are assessed by four DOL program agencies: OSHA; MSHA; PWBA; and ESA.
Together, these agencies assess approximately $100 million in penalties each year.
Through reinvention efforts, program agencies have worked to improve regulated conditions by working cooperatively and proactively with private comprehensive payment system modification will be completed.
In FY 1997, DOL agencies made 174,297 payments that were subject to the Prompt Payment Act, with a total dollar value of $25 million.
Interest penalties due to late payments were $139,117.
Overall, the trend toward fewer, larger payments continued, as total dollar volume of payments subject to Prompt Pay increased by $120 million, while the number of payments fell by approximately 5,000.
The number and percentage of late payments fell from 12,606 to 11,818, or from 7.00% to 6.79%, respectively.
The total number and volume of late payment interest penalties rose slightly; however, the total dollar volume of penalties continues to represent (at less than three-tenths of one percent) a statistically insignificant portion of payments made.
The Department's programs provide limited opportunities for establishing user fees.
All fees were appropriately updated for the user fee provisions of the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, and a Departmentwide policy is being updated.
The OIG is charged with preventing fraud, waste, and abuse and promoting economy, efficiency and effectiveness in DOL programs and operations.
The OIG is also responsible for conducting criminal investigations to eliminate the influence of organized crime and labor racketeering on employee benefit plans, labor-management relations and union affairs.
During FY 1997, the OIG issued 313 reports on DOL programs and operations and opened a total of 529 investigations.
The OIG questioned costs totaling $26.2 million and recommended that another $24.2 million in DOL funds be put to better use.
In response to current and previous OIG recommendations, DOL management disallowed $7.4 million and agreed to put almost $1 million to better use.
Moreover, the Department achieved a cost-avoidance of $4.7 million from resolution of previous OIG evaluations.
OIG investigations resulted in 265 indictments, 225 convictions and $41.3 million in monetary results such as fines, penalties and restitution.
OIG program fraud investigations focused on suspected wrongdoing by DOL contractors, grantees, program participants, beneficiaries, and employees.
Through labor racketeering investigations, the OIG worked to contribute to the Government's effort to reduce the influence of organized crime and labor racketeering in employee benefit plans, labor-management relations and union affairs.
In FY 97, the OIG developed and began implementation of a strategic plan that establishes the OIG's priorities, goals, and performance targets for 6 years.
Specific OIG accomplishments are detailed under each of the Secretary's goals.
In addition, the OIG worked to achieve its goal to improve the effectiveness, efficiency, and management of DOL agencies, programs, and operations.
For example, the OIG provided an assessment as to the financial status of DOL through its audits of the consolidated financial statements and the financial statements of the UI, Black Lung, Longshore and DC Trust Funds and the FECA Special Fund.
The OIG worked with the Department to address issues related to the implementation of GPRA and provided recommendations to the Department regarding the sharing of information and consolidating of reports needed by VETS, ESA and the EEOC.
Work was performed with PWBA and the CIO on the new Form 5500 reporting system development efforts.
The Inspector General Act Amendments require explanations for all audit reports with recommendations open for more than one year.
DOL management and audit communities agree that some of these audit resolutions will require several years to complete the corrective action.
As of 9/30/97, 118 audit reports have been open for over one year.
The total value of open audits of $25.1 million covers 627 separate recommendations.
Table VIII demonstrates that most of the reportable audits and recommendations that are over one year old are not under the direct control of and cannot be closed by the Department of Labor.
Auditees have certain rights to appeal audit decisions made by the Office of the Inspector General, including appeals to an Administrative Law Judge or a Federal Circuit Court of Appeals.
Audits are not considered closed simply because the claim is being appealed and sent forward for further action.
DOL agencies and the OIG jointly manage and update an audit tracking system where the current status of each open audit is maintained.
Final action cannot be taken until the reviewing officials issue their decision.
Many of these decisions take years before being rendered and the audit closed.
Of the 118 open audit reports requiring further discussion, 49 were monetary audits totaling $5,126,992 and 69 were non-monetary reports.
Of the 49 monetary audits, 3 had a value above $900,000, 15 had a value between $100,000-$680,000 and 31 had a value below $100,000.
At the end of the reporting period, there were 216 audit reports totaling $55,410,757 requiring final action.
This figure includes Disallowed Costs of $ 47,510,757, and $7,900,000 which represents recommendations to put Funds To Better Use.
Several compliance issues from the recent OIG audit of the Department’s FY 1997 Consolidated Financial Statements are not discussed elsewhere in this document.
The include the ETA grant closeout process, ETA’s not charging or documenting administrative costs or penalties to its debtors, ETA’s use of unapproved OMB forms for the Migrant and Seasonal Farm worker program, and UIS’ need to reestablish the Advisory council on Unemployment Compensation.
The next OIG audit of the Department’s FY 1998 Consolidated Financial Statements will examine cost allocation issues in the Working Capital Fund.
Cost allocation methodologies were modified in FY 1997, subject to later audit verification.
These issues are being addressed currently within the Department’s audit resolution process.
The most significant of the open audits are discussed under the Strategic Goals above.
A detailed listing of the audits is available upon request from the Office of the Chief Financial Officer or maybe accessed at http://www.dol.gov/dol/ocfo/publications/main.htm (1997 Semi-Annual Management Report).
Attached is the final report on the subject audit.
We have opined on the consolidated financial statements taken as a whole and the individual financial statements of the following funds: As a result of audit work performed by GAO combined with analytical work we performed, the scope restrictions related to the lack of audit assurances for tax revenues for the Unemployment Trust Fund and the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund have been removed for the year ended September 30, 1997.
Therefore, for the first time, our opinion of the Department's financial statements (FY 1997) is unqualified.
The Department has made great strides this year in resolving and closing prior year recommendations.
Twenty-eight prior year recommendations have been closed, including 6 which were previously unresolved.
In addition, 14 previously unresolved recommendations have been resolved.
Moreover, the section of the report on internal control notes no material weaknesses.
Attached is the final report on the subject audit.
As a result of audit work performed by GAO combined with analytical work we performed, the scope restrictions related to the lack of audit assurances for tax revenues for the Unemployment Trust Fund and the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund have been removed for the year ended September 30, 1997.
Therefore, for the first time, our opinion of the Department's financial statements (FY 1997) is unqualified.
Moreover, the section of the report on internal control notes no material weaknesses.
In the section of the report on compliance with laws and regulations, we noted seven systems that are not in substantial compliance with the requirements of the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996: Wage and Hour's Back Wage and Civil Monetary Penalties systems, ETA's debt management subsidiary system (Rbase), MSHA's and OSHA's penalty tracking systems, and Job Corps' real and personal property systems.
In addition, we noted four instances of other noncompliance related to Wage and Hour's Back Wage System (as it pertains to reversion of unclaimed back wages to Treasury), the ETA grant closeout process, ETA's use of unapproved OMB forms for the Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker program, and UTF's delay in reestablishing the Advisory Council on Unemployment Compensation.
The principal financial statements included in this report have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (P.L. 101-576) and OMB Bulletin 94-01, "Form and Content of Agency Financial Statements."
The responsibility for the integrity of the financial information included in these statements rests with management of the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL).
The audit of DOL's principal financial statements was performed by the Office of Inspector General.
The auditors' report accompanies the principal statements.
The Department's principal financial statements for fiscal years 1997 and 1996 consist of the following: The principal financial statements have been prepared to report the financial position and results of operations of DOL pursuant to the requirements of the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 and the Government Management Reform Act of 1994.
The statements should be read with the realization that they are from a sovereign entity, that unfunded liabilities reported in the financial statements cannot be liquidated without the enactment of an appropriation, and that the payment of all liabilities other than for contracts can be abrogated by the sovereign entity.
While the statements have been prepared from the books and records of DOL in accordance with the formats prescribed by OMB, the statements are different from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources which are prepared from the same books and records.
The accompanying principal statements summarize DOL's financial position, results of operations, changes in net position and significant cash flows during fiscal years 1997 and 1996.
A summary of the Department's operating results and financial position during the two fiscal years follows.
These consolidated financial statements present the financial position and results of operations of the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL), a cabinet level agency of the Executive Branch of the United States Government.
DOL, through the execution of its congressionally approved budget, operates programs under three of the major budget functions established by Congress in the Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974: (1) education, training, employment and social services; (2) health (occupational health and safety); and (3) income security.
DOL's financial activity is recorded in individual funds, which are combined for reporting purposes into three separate fund types: Revolving Fund - This fund type is used to account for the financing of goods or services provided by a central operation to agencies and other functions within DOL.
Operations are funded on a cost reimbursement basis by the recipients of the goods or services.
Trust Fund - This fund type is used to account for receipts that are held in trust and dedicated to specific purposes or for use in carrying out specific programs.
The assets of trust funds may be held over a period of time and may be used to purchase revenue producing investments.
General (Appropriated) Fund - This fund type is used to account for receipts not dedicated to specific purposes and expenses arising under congressional appropriations or other authorizations to spend general revenues.
DOL and the Department of the Treasury (Treasury) are jointly responsible for the operations of two of the largest funds within the reporting entity, the Unemployment Trust Fund and the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
DOL's Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and Employment Standards Administration (ESA), respectively, are responsible for the administrative oversight and policy direction for the income security programs financed by those trust funds.
Treasury acts as custodian over monies deposited into those funds and also invests amounts in excess of disbursing requirements in Treasury securities on behalf of DOL.
Through agreement with Treasury, DOL consolidates the financial results of the Unemployment Trust Fund and the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund for the preparation of financial statements prescribed under Section 303(b) of the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act of 1990.
The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), a wholly owned Federal government corporation under the chairmanship of the Secretary of Labor, has been designated by OMB as a separate reporting entity for financial statement purposes and has been excluded from the DOL reporting entity.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of all funds under DOL control.
All interfund balances and transactions have been eliminated.
The consolidated financial statements do not include the effect of centrally administered assets and liabilities related to the Federal government as a whole, which may in part be attributable to DOL.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared to report the financial position and results of operations of DOL, as required by the CFO Act of 1990, and the Government Management Reform Act of 1994.
They have been prepared from the books and records of DOL, in accordance with the form and content for entity financial statements specified by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in OMB Bulletin 94-01, certain supplemental provisions of OMB Bulletin 97-01 applicable to 1997 and 1996, and DOL's accounting policies, as summarized in Note 1.
These statements are, therefore, different from the financial reports, also prepared by DOL pursuant to OMB directives, that are used to monitor and control DOL's use of budgetary resources.
OMB Bulletin 94-01 requires that agencies include in their principal financial statements a Statement of Budgetary Resources and Actual Expenses.
DOL management requested and OMB granted a waiver of this requirement for 1997 and 1996.
Under the authority of the CFO Act of 1990, the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) was established to recommend Federal accounting standards to the Secretary of the Treasury, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Comptroller General, co-principals of the Joint Financial Management Improvement Project (JFMIP).
Specific standards agreed upon by the three principals will be issued by the Director of OMB and the Comptroller General.
DOL has adopted this other comprehensive basis of accounting for preparation of these financial statements.
Effective October 1, 1996, DOL adopted Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards (SFFAS) No. 5, Accounting for Liabilities of the Federal Government.
SFFAS No. 5 requires the Department to recognize, at the time eligible employees' services are rendered, the projected cost to provide future pension benefits to these covered employees, and to recognize as an imputed financing source the amount of recognized pension expense in excess of pension contributions made by the Department.
This imputed amount represents the pension expense to be financed by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), the Federal agency administering DOL's pension plans.
Prior to the enactment of SFFAS No. 5, DOL recognized as pension expense the amount of Departmental contributions to the various pension plans.
See Notes 1.O and 13.)
SFFAS No. 5 also requires the Department to recognize, at the time eligible employees' services are rendered, the projected future cost to provide post-retirement health and life insurance benefits (other retirement benefits [ORB]) to these eligible employees.
Under SFFAS No. 5, an amount equal to the recorded ORB expense is recognized as an imputed financing source, to be provided for by OPM.
Previously DOL recognized an expense for other retirement benefits as they became due and payable.
The accumulated pension expense, ORB expense and imputed financing source resulting from this change were recognized in 1997 as a one time adjustment to operating expenses and financing sources, with no effect on the net results of operations.
See Notes 1.O, 1.P and 13.)
Budgetary accounting measures the appropriation and consumption of budget authority and other budgetary resources.
Within DOL budget authority is derived from (1) cost reimbursement for the provision of goods or services, (2) receipts that are held in trust for use in carrying out specific purposes and programs in accordance with agreements or statutes, (3) receipts not dedicated to specific purposes and (4) congressional appropriations or other authorizations to spend general revenues.
DOL receives a portion of the funding needed to support its programs through congressional appropriations.
A financing source, appropriated capital used, is recognized to the extent these appropriated funds have been consumed.
Appropriations are consumed through the recognition of accrued expenses for which budgetary resources have been obligated.
Accrued expenses not covered by budgetary resources do not consume appropriated capital in the period recognized, and must be funded from future appropriations.
The consumption of appropriations expended to purchase capital items is recognized as appropriated capital used over the useful life of the asset, through depreciation and amortization expense.
Revenues are recognized as a financing source to the extent reimbursements are payable or imputed to DOL from other Federal agencies and from the public, as a result of costs incurred or services performed on their behalf.
Revenue between DOL agencies and between DOL funds is eliminated.
Major sources of revenue include reimbursements due to the Federal Employees' (Workers') Compensation Special Benefit Fund (Federal Employees Workers' Compensation Fund) from Federal agencies for the costs of disability compensation and medical care provided to or accrued on behalf of their employees, and reimbursements due to the Unemployment Trust Fund from Federal agencies, state and local government entities and non-profit organizations for the cost of unemployment benefits provided to or accrued on behalf of their employees.
Financing sources imputed to DOL to provide for pension and ORB expenses financed by OPM are recognized as revenues from other Federal agencies.
The Unemployment Trust Fund, Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act Trust Fund (Longshore and Harbor Workers' Trust Fund), District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Trust Fund (District of Columbia Trust Fund) and Panama Canal Commission Compensation Fund receive interest revenues on fund investments.
Interest revenue is recognized when earned.
Interest revenue from these investments was $3.9 billion and $3.4 billion in 1997 and 1996, respectively.
Interest earned on Federal funds in the possession of non-Federal entities is payable to the DOL.
Non-Federal interest revenue received or due from these sources was $6.2 million and $3.6 million in 1997 and 1996, respectively.
The Longshore and Harbor Workers' Trust Fund and District of Columbia Trust Fund receive revenues from assessments levied on insurance companies and self-insured employers.
Assessments are recognized as revenues when earned.
Assessment revenue was $124.4 million and $130.3 million in 1997 and 1996, respectively.
Federal and state unemployment taxes are collected from employers based on wages paid to employees in covered employment.
Federal unemployment taxes are collected by the Internal Revenue Service (the collecting entity) and transferred to designated Federal accounts within the Unemployment Trust Fund (the receiving entity).
State unemployment taxes are collected by each State (the collecting entity) and deposited in separate State accounts within the Unemployment Trust Fund (the receiving entity).
Federal unemployment taxes are used to pay the Federal share of extended unemployment benefits and to provide for Federal and State administrative expenses related to the operation of the unemployment insurance program.
State unemployment taxes are restricted in their use to the payment of unemployment benefits.
Excise taxes are collected from coal mine operators based on the sale of coal.
These excise taxes are collected by the Internal Revenue Service (the collecting entity) and transferred to the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund (the receiving entity).
Transfers are based on assessed excise taxes as determined by the collecting entity.
Excise taxes are used to pay disability benefits and related administrative expenses.
Employer tax revenues are recognized on a modified cash basis, to the extent of cash transferred by the collecting entity to the receiving entity, plus the change in inter-entity balances between the collecting and receiving entity.
Inter-entity balances represent revenue received by the collecting entity but not yet transferred to the receiving entity, as well as adjustments made by the collecting entity to previous transfers.
State unemployment tax revenues were $21.1 billion and $21.8 billion in 1997 and 1996, respectively.
Federal unemployment tax revenues were $6.1 billion and $5.9 billion in 1997 and 1996, respectively.
Excise tax revenues were $19.4 million and $609.2 million in 1997 and 1996, respectively.
Penalties levied against employers by OSHA, MSHA, ESA and PWBA for regulatory violations, ETA disallowed grant costs assessed against cancelled appropriations and FECA administrative costs assessed against government corporations in excess of amounts reserved to finance capital improvements in the Federal Employees Workers Compensation Fund are not available to the agencies for obligation or expenditure, and must be transferred to the general fund of the U. S. Treasury.
These penalties and other assessments are recognized as financing sources when earned.
A contra financing source, receipts to be transferred to Treasury, is also recognized.
Expenses are presented in the consolidated statement of operations by major program.
Depreciation and amortization, bad debts and interest expense are allocated to each major program expense, and are not shown separately, as delineated in OMB Bulletin 94-01.
Expenses by object class and type are presented in Note 12.
DOL cash receipts and disbursements are processed by the U.S. Treasury.
Funds with U.S. Treasury represent obligated and unobligated balances available to finance allowable expenditures and restricted balances, including amounts related to expired authority and amounts not available for use by DOL.
See Note 2.)
DOL administers funds which are invested by Treasury in securities of the U.S. government.
Funds held in the Unemployment Trust Fund are invested by Treasury in marketable and non-marketable Treasury securities.
Investments are stated at cost and adjusted for amortization of premiums and discounts using the effective interest method.
Funds held in the Panama Canal Commission Compensation Fund, the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Trust Fund and the District of Columbia Trust Fund are also invested by Treasury in marketable Treasury securities.
These investments are stated at amortized cost which approximates market, and discounts and premiums are amortized using the straight-line method, which approximates the effective interest method.
The majority of DOL's investments are in non-marketable special issue U.S. Treasury securities, redeemable on demand at their maturity value, which is equivalent to their carrying value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Special issues may be bought or sold only by Federal government agencies and trust funds.
No secondary market exists for these instruments; therefore, no provision is made in the financial statements for unrealized gains or losses.
3.) The Federal Employees Compensation (FEC) account within the Unemployment Trust Fund provides unemployment insurance (UI) benefits to eligible Federal workers (UCFE) and ex-service members (UCX).
The FEC account is reimbursed for these payments by the responsible Federal agencies.
DOL records as accounts receivable amounts due from other Federal agencies for unreimbursed UCFE and UCX benefits.
FECA charges for workers' compensation benefits are paid by DOL on behalf of other Federal agencies.
DOL's Special Benefit Fund is reimbursed for these payments by the responsible Federal agencies.
DOL records as accounts receivable amounts due from other Federal agencies for unreimbursed FECA benefits.
DOL recognizes as accounts receivable State unemployment taxes due from employers within the states and unemployment benefit overpayments that states determined were paid to individuals who were not entitled to receive benefits.
Also included as accounts receivable are Black Lung Disability, Federal Employees Workers' Compensation, Longshore and Harbor Workers' and District of Columbia benefit overpayments made to individuals who were determined ineligible to receive benefits.
The Department also recognizes as accounts receivable amounts due for fines and penalties levied against employers by OSHA, MSHA, ESA and PWBA for regulatory violations and amounts due from ETA's grantees and contractors for disallowed grant costs.
The amounts due for receivables are stated net of an allowance for uncollectible accounts.
The estimate of the allowance is based on past experience in the collection of the receivables and an analysis of the outstanding balances.
4.)
DOL makes advances to state employment security agencies and to grantees and contractors to provide for future DOL program expenditures.
These payments are recorded as an asset, which is reduced when actual expenditures or estimates of unreported expenditures are recorded by DOL.
See Note 5.)
The majority of DOL's property, plant and equipment is held by Job Corps centers owned and operated by DOL through a network of contractors.
DOL also maintains a departmental property system which accounts for capital equipment used by DOL management.
Property, plant and equipment purchases and additions are stated at cost.
Normal repairs and maintenance are charged to expense as incurred.
Effective in 1996, plant and equipment and internally developed software and systems costs, including hardware, with a cost greater than $25,000 ($5,000 for the Working Capital Fund) and a useful life of 2 or more years are capitalized and depreciated.
Plant and equipment and internally developed software and systems costing less than $25,000 ($5,000 for the Working Capital Fund) or having a useful life of less than 2 years, are charged to expense at the time of purchase.
Previously plant and equipment with a cost greater than $25,000 and a useful life of 2 or more years and internally developed software and systems costs, including hardware, with a cost greater than $25,000 and a useful life of 2 or more years were capitalized and depreciated.
Plant and equipment costing less than $5,000 or having a useful life of less than 2 years and internally developed software and systems costing less than $25,000 or having a useful life of less than 2 years, were charged to expense at the time of purchase.
These changes were treated prospectively.
Job Corps center construction costs are capitalized as construction-in-progress until completed and are then classified as improvements to facilities.
Leasehold improvements made at Job Corps centers and DOL facilities leased from the General Services Administration are recorded at cost and amortized over their useful lives or the term of the lease, using the straight-line amortization method.
Plant and equipment are depreciated over their useful lives using the straight-line method of depreciation.
The following table shows the depreciation periods used for the major classes of DOL plant and equipment: Programs administering DOL funds have acquired real and tangible property in which DOL has a reversionary interest.
The current value of real property in which DOL has a reversionary interest is $381.0 million.
The value of tangible property is not determinable.
6.) Funds are provided by Congressional appropriation, as advances to DOL's Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, as may be necessary to meet the obligations of the fund.
Financing for these advances is provided through transfers from the Advances to the Unemployment Trust Fund and Other Funds appropriation.
These advances are repayable with interest at a rate determined by the Secretary of the Treasury to be equal to the current average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods to maturity comparable to the anticipated period during which the advance will be outstanding.
Advances made prior to 1982 carried rates of interest equal to the average rate borne by all marketable interest-bearing obligations of the United States then forming a part of the public debt.
Outstanding advances at September 30, 1997 and 1996 bear interest rates ranging from 6.125% to 13.875%.
Amounts in the trust fund shall be available, as provided by appropriation acts, for the repayment of and the payment of interest on, these repayable advances.
Interest and principal are payable to the general fund of the Treasury when the Secretary of the Treasury determines that funds are available in the trust fund for such purposes.
7.) The accompanying financial statements include a liability for unemployment, disability and workers' compensation benefits payable under the provisions of the Social Security Act, the Black Lung Benefit Act, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act, the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and the District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Act.
Unemployment, disability and workers' compensation benefits authorized by these Acts are paid from designated funds administered by DOL.
Within each program, DOL recognizes a liability for certain unpaid benefits, as discussed below: (See Note 9.) The Unemployment Trust Fund, established under the authority of Section 904 of the Social Security Act of 1935, as amended, provides benefits to unemployed workers who meet State and Federal eligibility requirements.
Regular and extended unemployment benefits are paid from State accounts within the Unemployment Trust Fund, financed by a State unemployment tax on employer payrolls.
Fifty percent of the cost of extended unemployment benefits is paid from the Extended Unemployment Compensation Account within the Unemployment Trust Fund, financed by a Federal unemployment tax on employer payrolls.
Unemployment benefits to unemployed Federal workers are paid from the Federal Employee Compensation Account within the Unemployment Trust Fund.
These benefit costs are reimbursed by the responsible Federal agency.
DOL recognizes a liability for regular and extended unemployment benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
DOL recognizes a liability for Federal employees' unemployment benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits for existing claims filed during the current period, payable in the subsequent period.
2. Black Lung Disability Trust Fund The Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, established under the authority of the Black Lung Benefits Revenue Act, provides for compensation and medical benefits for eligible coal miners who are disabled due to pneumoconiosis (black lung disease).
DOL recognizes a liability for disability benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
3. Federal Employees Workers' Compensation Fund The Federal Employees' (Workers) Compensation Special Benefit Fund (Federal Employees Workers' Compensation Fund), established under the authority of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA), provides income and medical cost protection to covered Federal civilian employees injured on the job, employees who have incurred a work-related occupational disease and beneficiaries of employees whose death is attributable to a job-related injury or occupational disease.
The fund is reimbursed by other Federal agencies for the FECA benefit payments made on behalf of their workers.
A liability for workers' compensation benefits payable by the Special Benefit Fund to the employees of other Federal agencies is accrued to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
The fund also provides 50% of the annual cost-of-living adjustments for pre-1972 compensation cases under the authority of Section 10(h) of the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and the District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Act.
DOL recognizes a liability for 10(h) payments to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
L. Future Workers' Compensation Benefits The accompanying financial statements include a liability for future workers' compensation benefits payable by DOL to its employees, to employees of the Panama Canal Commission and to enrollees of the Job Corps, as well as a liability for future workers' compensation benefits payable by the Special Benefit Fund which are not chargeable to other Federal agencies.
The Special Benefit Fund assumes a liability for nonchargeable FECA benefits equal to the projected gross liability for future FECA benefits for all Federal agencies less the reserve credits to be charged back to those agencies.
The liability includes the expected liability for death, disability, medical and other approved costs, and is determined using the paid-loss extrapolation method.
This methodology uses historical benefit payment patterns related to a specific incurred period to yield projected annual benefit payments, which have been discounted to present value.
The interest rates utilized for discounting for fiscal year 1997 were 6.24% in 1998, 5.82% in 1999, 5.60% in 2000, 5.45% in 2001, 5.40% in 2002 and thereafter.
The interest rates utilized for discounting for fiscal year 1996 were 6.21% in 1997, 5.97% in 1998, 5.60% in 1999, 5.32% in 2000, 5.15% in 2001 and 5.10% in 2002 and thereafter.
In fiscal year 1997, the methodology was enhanced to provide more specifically for the effects of inflation on the liability for future workers' compensation benefits.
Wage inflation factors (cost of living adjustments or COLAs) and medical inflation factors (consumer price index medical or CPIMs) were added and applied to the calculation of projected future benefits.
These factors were also used to adjust the methodology's historical payments to current year constant dollars.
Also included were a change in the assumption of the timing of compensation payments, from an assumed one payment per year to thirteen payments per year, and an extension of the projected number of years of benefit payments, from 23 years to 37 years.
The compensation COLAs and CPIMs used in the projections were as follows: The increase in the estimated projected gross liability for future FECA benefits for all Federal agencies was due primarily to the enhancements in the methodology.
These changes were treated prospectively.
See Note 10.)
A liability for annual and compensatory leave is accrued as leave is earned and paid when leave is taken.
At year end, leave balances are revalued to reflect current wages.
The balance of leave earned but not taken will be paid from future funding sources.
Sick leave and other types of nonvested leave are expensed as taken.
DOL employees are eligible to participate in the contributory Federal Employees Health Benefit Program (FEHBP) and the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Program (FEGLIP).
DOL makes matching contributions to the FEHBP and FEGLIP on behalf of active employees to pay for current benefits.
These contributions are recognized as current operating expenses.
During 1997 and 1996, DOL contributions to the FEHBP and FEGLIP were $36.4 million and $37.8 million respectively.
DOL employees participate in either the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) or the Federal Employees' Retirement System (FERS), implemented on January 1, 1987.
For employees participating in CSRS, DOL withholds 7.00% of their gross earnings.
This withholding is matched by DOL, and the total of employee withholdings and DOL contributions is transferred to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund.
For employees in FERS, DOL withholds 0.8% of gross earnings, and matches the withholding with an 11.4% contribution.
This total is transferred to the Federal Employees' Retirement Fund.
The CSRS and FERS retirement funds are administered by the OPM.
DOL contributions to the CSRS and FERS are recognized as operating expenses.
FERS participants are also covered under the Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) and are subject to FICA withholdings.
DOL makes matching contributions to FICA, recognized as operating expenses.
DOL's contributions were $19.6 million and $18.1 million during 1997 and 1996, respectively.
On April 1, 1987, the Federal government initiated the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP), which is a defined contribution retirement savings and investment plan for employees covered by either FERS or CSRS.
For employees covered under FERS, DOL contributes to the TSP an amount equal to 1% of the employees' pay.
FERS participants may contribute up to 10% of their gross pay to the TSP.
DOL matches 100% of the first 3% contributed and 50% of the next 2% contributed.
CSRS participants may contribute up to 5% of their gross pay to the TSP, but there is no departmental matching contribution.
The maximum amount that either FERS or CSRS employees may contribute to the TSP in a calendar year is $9,500.
DOL contributions to the TSP are recognized as operating expenses.
The total of employee and departmental contributions is transferred to the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board.
Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards (SFFAS) No. 5, Accounting for Liabilities of the Federal Government, implemented by DOL effective October 1, 1996, requires the Department to recognize the full cost of providing future CSRS and FERS pension benefits to covered employees at the time the employees' services are rendered.
The pension expense recognized in the financial statements equals the service cost for covered DOL employees, less amounts contributed by these employees.
Service cost represents the actuarial present value of benefits attributed to services rendered by covered employees during the accounting period.
The measurement of service cost requires the use of actuarial cost methods to determine the percentage of the employees' basic compensation sufficient to fund their projected pension benefit.
These percentages (cost factors) are provided by OPM, and applied by DOL to the basic annual compensation of covered employees to arrive at the amount of total pension expense to be recognized in DOL's financial statements.
The excess of total pension expense over the amount contributed by the Department and DOL's employees represents the amount of pension expense which must be financed directly by OPM.
To provide for this excess pension expense, DOL recognized in its financial statements for 1997 an imputed financing source equal to the excess amount, included as revenue from other Federal agencies.
See Note 13.)
DOL does not report in its financial statements FERS or CSRS assets, accumulated plan benefits or unfunded liabilities, if any, applicable to its employees.
DOL employees eligible to participate in the contributory Federal Employees Health Benefit Program and the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Program may continue to participate in these programs after their retirement.
DOL continues to make contributions to the FEHBP and FEGLIP on behalf of retired employees to provide for these post-retirement benefits.
SFFAS No. 5 requires DOL to recognize a current expense for the future cost of other retirement benefits (ORB) at the time the employee's services are rendered.
Using cost factors supplied by OPM, DOL recognized a current expense for the future cost of post-retirement health and life insurance benefits in its financial statements for 1997.
This ORB expense must be financed by OPM, and is offset by DOL through recognition of an imputed financing source, recorded as revenue from other Federal agencies in the financial statements.
The accumulated expense for other retirement benefits and the imputed financing source recognized during 1997 were $36.2 million.
Each fund balance incorporated in DOL's net position consists of one or more of the following components: Unexpended appropriations include the undelivered orders and unobligated balances of DOL's general (appropriated) funds.
Multi-year appropriations remain available to DOL for obligation in future periods.
Unobligated balances associated with appropriations that expire at the end of the fiscal year remain available for obligation adjustments, but not new obligations, until that account is closed, generally five years after the appropriations expire.
Invested capital represents U.S. Government resources invested in the DOL's assets, principally property, plant and equipment, and other capitalized assets such as leasehold improvements.
Increases to invested capital are recorded when assets are acquired and decreases occur as a result of the consumption (depreciation) or disposition of capital assets.
Cumulative results of operations represents the net difference between expenses and losses consuming budgetary resources and financing sources and gains providing budgetary resources of the Unemployment, Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation and District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Trust Funds and the ETA and Departmental Management revolving funds during the current and prior periods.
Certain liabilities are not covered by and certain assets do not provide current budgetary resources.
Net position has been reduced to reflect the excess of these liabilities over assets.
These liabilities will require funding from future appropriations or other budgetary resources.
Future appropriations will be made at the discretion of Congress.
The consolidated net position by fund component for all funds as of September 30, 1997 and 1996 is presented in Note 11.
Certain amounts for 1996 have been reclassified to conform with the 1997 presentation of these amounts.
The Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) has classified certain government income transfer programs as social insurance programs.
Recognizing that these programs have complex characteristics that do not fit traditional accounting models, the FASAB is developing accounting standards for social insurance programs which require the presentation of supplementary stewardship information to facilitate the assessment of the program’s long term sustainability.
The U.S. Department of Labor operates two programs classified under Federal accounting standards as social insurance programs, the Unemployment Insurance Program and the Black Lung Disability Benefits Program.
Presented below is the supplementary stewardship information for the two programs.
The unemployment insurance (UI) program was created in 1935 to provide income assistance to unemployed workers who have lost their jobs through no fault of their own.
The program protects workers during temporary periods of unemployment through the provision of unemployment compensation benefits.
These benefits replace part of the unemployed worker’s lost wages and, in so doing, stabilize the economy during recessionary periods by increasing the unemployed’s purchasing power.
The UI program operates counter cyclically, with benefits exceeding tax collections during recessionary periods and UI tax revenues exceeding benefit payments during periods of recovery.
The UI program is administered through a unique system of Federal-State partnerships, established in Federal law but executed through conforming State laws by State officials.
The Federal government provides broad policy guidance and program direction through the oversight of the U.S. Department of Labor, while program details are established through individual State UI statutes, administered through State UI agencies.
The UI program is financed through the collection of Federal and State unemployment taxes levied on subject employers and deposited in the Unemployment Trust Fund (UTF).
The UTF was established to account for the receipt, investment and disbursement of unemployment taxes.
Federal unemployment taxes are used to pay for the administrative costs of the UI program, including grants to each State to cover the costs of State UI operations and the Federal share of extended UI benefits.
Federal unemployment taxes are also used to maintain a loan account within the UTF, from which insolvent States may borrow funds to pay UI benefits.
State UI taxes are used exclusively for the payment of regular UI benefits, as well as the State’s share of extended benefits.
Under the provisions of the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA), a Federal tax is levied on covered employers, at a current rate of 6.2% of the first $7,000 in annual wages paid to each employee.
This Federal tax rate is reduced by a credit of up to 5.4%, granted to employers paying State UI taxes under conforming State UI statutes.
Accordingly, in conforming States, employers pay an effective Federal tax of 0.8%.
Federal unemployment taxes are collected by the Internal Revenue Service.
Separate State Accounts were established for each State and territory depositing monies into the Fund, in accordance with Section 904 of the Act.
State unemployment taxes are deposited into these individual accounts and may be used only to pay State unemployment benefits.
States may receive repayable advances from the FUA when their balances in the Fund are insufficient to pay benefits.
The Railroad UI Account and Railroad UI Administrative Account were established under Section 904 of the Act to provide for a separate unemployment insurance program for railroad employees.
This separate unemployment insurance program is administered by the Railroad Retirement Board, an agency independent of DOL.
DOL is not responsible for the administrative oversight or solvency of the railroad unemployment insurance system.
Receipts from taxes on railroad payrolls are deposited in the Railroad UI Account and the Railroad UI Administrative Account to meet benefit payment and related administrative expenses.
The UI program provides regular and extended benefit payments to eligible unemployed workers.
Regular UI program benefits are established under State law, payable for a period not to exceed a maximum duration.
In 1970, Federal law began to require States to extend this maximum period of benefit duration by fifty percent, during periods of high unemployment.
These extended benefit payments are paid equally from Federal and State accounts.
There are no Federal standards regarding eligibility, amount or duration of regular UI benefits.
Eligibility requirements, as well as benefit amounts and benefit duration are determined under State law.
Under State laws, worker eligibility for benefits depends on experience in covered employment during a past base period, which attempts to measure the workers' recent attachment to the labor force.
Three factors are common to State eligibility requirements: (1) a minimum duration of recent employment and earnings during a base period prior to unemployment, (2) unemployment not the fault of the unemployed, and (3) availability of the unemployed for work.
Benefit payment amounts under all State laws vary with the worker's base period wage history.
Generally, States compute the amount of weekly UI benefits as a percentage of an individual's average weekly base period earnings, within certain minimum and maximum limits.
Most States set the duration of UI benefits by the amount of earnings an individual has received during the base period.
Currently, all States have established the maximum duration for regular UI benefits at 26 weeks.
Regular UI benefits are paid by the State UI agencies from monies drawn down from the State's account within the Unemployment Trust Fund.
The Federal/State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970 provides for the extension of the duration of UI benefits during periods of high unemployment.
When the insured unemployment level within a State, or in some cases total unemployment, reaches certain specified levels, the State must extend benefit duration by fifty percent, up to a combined maximum of 39 weeks.
Fifty percent of the cost of extended unemployment benefits is paid from the Extended Unemployment Compensation Account within the UTF, and fifty percent by the State, from the State's UTF account.
The Black Lung Disability Benefits Program provides for compensation, medical and survivor benefits for eligible coal miners who are disabled due to pneumoconiosis (black lung disease) arising out of their coal mine employment.
The U.S. Department of Labor operates the Black Lung Disability Benefit Program.
The Black Lung Disability Trust Fund (BLDTF) provides benefit payments to eligible coal miners disabled by pneumoconiosis, when no responsible mine operator can be assigned the liability.
Benefit payments by the BLDTF are funded by excise taxes from coal mine operators based on the sale of coal, as are the fund’s administrative costs.
These taxes are collected by the Internal Revenue Service and transferred to the BLDTF, which was established under the authority of the Black Lung Benefits Revenue Act, and administered by the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
The Black Lung Benefits Revenue Act provides for repayable advances to the BLDTF from the general fund of the Treasury, in the event that BLDTF resources are not adequate to meet program obligations.
At September 30, 1997, total liabilities of the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund exceeded assets by $5.5 billion.
This deficit fund balance represented the accumulated shortfall of excise taxes necessary to meet benefit payment and interest expenses.
This shortfall was funded by repayable advances to the BLDTF, which are repayable with interest.
Outstanding advances at September 30, 1997 were $5.5 billion, bearing interest rates ranging from 6.125 to 13.875 percent.
Excise tax revenues of $619.4 million, benefit payment expense of $474.2 million and interest expense of $470.6 million were recognized for the year ended September 30, 1997.
As discussed in Note 1.K.3, DOL recognized a liability for disability benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
Accrued disability benefits payable at September 30, 1997 were $34.9 million.
Although no liability was recognized for future payments to be made to present and future program participants, beyond the due and payable amounts accrued at year end, future estimated cash inflows and outflows of the BLDTF are tracked by the Department for budgetary purposes.
These projections, made over the forty-five year period ending September 30, 2040, indicate that cash inflows from excise taxes will exceed cash outflows for benefit payments and administrative expenses for each period projected.
This net cash inflow is projected to reach $16.0 billion by the year 2040.
However, cash outflows, when combined with interest payments required to finance the BLDTF’s repayable advances, exceed cash inflows during each of the forty five periods included in the projections.
Net cash outflows after interest payments are projected to exceed $28.2 billion by the end of the year 2040, increasing the BLDTF’s deficit as of September 30, 2040 to $33.7 billion.
See Chart III on following page.)
The Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) requires agencies to report annually to Congress on their financial status and any other information needed to fairly present the agencies' financial position and results of operations.
To meet the CFO Act reporting requirements, the United States Department of Labor (DOL), a Department of the United States Government, prepares annual financial statements, which we audit.
The objective of our audit is to express an opinion on the fair presentation of DOL's Fiscal Years (FYs) 1997 and 1996 consolidated financial statements.
Our objective also is to obtain an understanding of the Department's internal control and test its compliance with laws and regulations that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Except as discussed in the FY 1996 Scope Restriction section below, we conducted our audits in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and OMB Bulletin 93-06, Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements, as amended.
These standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.
An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
As required by OMB Bulletin 94-01, Form and Content of Agency Financial Statements, Note 1 to the financial statements describes the accounting policies used by the Department to prepare the financial statements, which is a comprehensive basis of accounting other than generally accepted accounting principles.
The financial statements for the years ended September 30, 1997 and 1996 include: Our audits included testing these expenses, financing sources, and balances at the Federal level only.
Pursuant to a mandate by Congress, the examination of these transactions below the Federal level is primarily performed by various auditors in accordance with the *Single Audit Act of 1984*, as amended and OMB Circulars A-128 and A-133.
The results of those audits are reported to each Federal agency which provides direct grants, and each Federal agency is responsible for resolving findings for its awards.
In accordance with the *Social Security Act*, the *Federal Unemployment Tax Act*, and the *Black Lung Benefits Act of 1977*, the United States Treasury collects Federal unemployment and coal taxes, places the collections in trust funds for the DOL, and maintains the documentation supporting the amounts collected.
We were unable to obtain independent verification or to otherwise satisfy ourselves as to the fair presentation of $5.9 billion of Federal unemployment and $6.6 billion of coal taxes stated in the FY 1996 financial statements.
The DOL does not have authority to require Treasury to provide access to their records for audit, and neither Treasury nor GAO performed audits of these revenues prior to FY 1997.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of the United States Department of Labor as of September 30, 1997 and 1996, and the related statements of operations and changes in net position, and cash flows for the years then ended.
Also, we have audited the individual financial statements of the funds referred to above as of and for the year ended September 30, 1997.
In our opinion, except for the effects of such adjustments, if any, on the 1996 financial statements as might have been determined to be necessary had we been able to obtain independent verification of the tax revenues referred to above, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with the accounting policies described in Note 1: * the financial position of the DOL as of September 30, 1997 and 1996; and * the results of operations, changes in net position, and cash flows of the DOL for the years ended September 30, 1997 and 1996.
As discussed in Notes 1 (Sections O and P) and 13 to the financial statements, for the year ended September 30, 1997, the Department changed its method of accounting for cost of pension and other retirement benefit costs paid by the Office of Personnel Management on behalf of the Department.
Our audits were conducted for the purpose of forming an opinion on the 1997 and 1996 consolidated financial statements of the DOL.
The information discussed below is presented for purposes of additional analysis and is not a required part of the principal financial statements.
The information in the Overview of the Reporting Entity and Supplemental Information sections of the Department's annual financial statements has not been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audits of the consolidated financial statements and individual financial statements and, accordingly, we express no opinion on it.
This information is addressed in our assessment of internal control discussed below.
We identified the following conditions that we believe are reportable conditions.
We noted other matters involving the internal control and its operation that will be reported to the management of DOL in a separate letter.
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, we performed tests of DOL's compliance with certain provisions of laws and regulations, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts and certain other laws and regulations specified in OMB Bulletin 93-06, as amended, including the requirements referred to in the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA).
However, the objective of our audit of the financial statements was not to provide an opinion on overall compliance with such provisions.
Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.
The results of our tests of compliance with the laws and regulations described in the preceding paragraph disclosed instances of noncompliance with the following laws and regulations that are required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards and OMB Bulletin 93-06, as amended, which are described below.
Under FFMIA, we are required to report whether DOL's financial management systems substantially comply with the Federal financial management systems requirements, applicable accounting standards, and the United States Standard General Ledger at the transaction level.
To meet this requirement, we performed tests of compliance using the implementation guidance for FFMIA issued by OMB on September 9, 1997.
To fulfill these responsibilities, we: * Reviewed the appropriate reports of GAO, DOL, OIG, and other previously issued reports relative to the scope of our financial statement audit.
Obtained an understanding of management’s process for evaluating and reporting on internal control and accounting systems as required by the *Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act* (FMFIA).
We also compared the material weaknesses reported in the Department’s FMFIA report that relate to the financial statements under audit to the reportable conditions found during the evaluation we conducted of the Department’s internal control.
However, our objective was not to provide an opinion on overall compliance with such provisions.
Obtained an understanding of the design of relevant internal control policies and procedures and whether they had been placed in operation.
Assessed control risk³.
Performed tests of significant controls on a selected basis.
Tested compliance with selected provisions of laws and regulations which may materially affect the financial statements and certain other laws and regulations designated by the Office of Management and Budget in Bulletin 93-06, as amended, including the requirements referred to in the *Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996* (FFMIA).
Reviewed internal controls pertaining to the existence and completeness assertions for systems producing performance measures in DOL’s overview of the reporting entity.
Examined, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.
Assessed the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management.
Evaluated the overall financial statement presentation.
This report is intended for the information of the U.S. Department of Labor management.
This restriction is not intended to limit the distribution of this report, which is a matter of public record.