I am pleased to issue the Department of Labor's accountability report for Fiscal Year 1998.
This report presents financial, program and performance data on the Department for Fiscal Year 1998 and charts our progress in meeting three strategic goals: A Prepared Workforce--to enhance opportunities for America's workforce; A Secure Workforce--to promote the economic security of workers and families; and Quality Workplaces--to foster workplaces that are safe, healthy, fair and free of discrimination.
I am committed to accomplishing the Department's strategic goals for America's workers, retirees and their families, and I will ensure that we achieve results with any tax dollars that we invest.
I am proud to report that the Department's Inspector General has issued an unqualified opinion on the Department's Financial Statements for FY 1998.
This achievement provides us with a solid foundation for meeting the high standards of financial reporting required by the Government Performance and Results Act and other statutes.
With this unqualified opinion and other information, I can certify with reasonable assurance that the Department's systems of accounting and internal controls comply with the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act.
Maintaining the public's trust and providing sound stewardship of tax dollars is a goal that is vital to me and to this Department.
My hope is that this report, which explains our programs and documents our achievements, will bolster the public's confidence that the Department of Labor is making wise and efficient use of its resources.
I am pleased to join with Secretary Herman in presenting the Department of Labor's Accountability Report for Fiscal Year 1998.
This report, authorized by the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 (GMRA), consolidates in one document information that was previously distributed in several separate reports.
The Department continues to establish an outstanding record in financial management.
Under GMRA and the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Act of 1990, all Federal agencies are required to produce annual financial statements, and to have the statements audited.
The Department's Inspector General issued an unqualified, or "clean," opinion on our Fiscal Year 1998 consolidated financial statements, the second consecutive year that DOL has attained this high level of financial performance.
The audit report also states that, once again, no material weaknesses were found in the department's system of internal controls that would affect the accuracy of financial statements.
Considerable effort was needed throughout the Department to meet new accounting standards that went into effect in FY 1998.
Most notably, our compliance with the new managerial cost accounting standard establishes an important foundation for relating financial and program information under the Government Performance and Results Act.
We continue to work to ensure that all financial systems comply with the requirements of the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act, and to resolve and close remaining reportable conditions raised in the 1998 financial statements audit.
In this past fiscal year, we brought two of seven subsidiary systems requiring modifications into compliance with the Act's standards.
We fully expect to bring four of the remaining systems into compliance in FY 1999 and the remaining system will be corrected in FY 2000.
I am pleased to report that the Department's core accounting and payroll systems meet the Act's standards, and have also been renovated to meet Year 2000 processing requirements.
This Accountability Report expands upon last year's presentation under the Department's Strategic Plan to include discussions of the programs furthering each of our eleven outcome goals.
These outcome goals are reported within Secretary Herman's three broad strategic goals.
Baseline information to be used next year when reporting for the first time under the Government Performance Results Act is featured in this report.
Our challenge in FY 1999 and beyond will be to provide our stakeholders an accounting for results against these baselines in each major program and provide useful, relevant financial information.
We look forward to meeting this challenge.
Created by a law signed by President William H. Taft on March 4, 1913, the U.S. Department of Labor is one of the oldest cabinet level departments in the Federal government.
The Department of Labor fosters and promotes the welfare of the job seekers, wage earners, and retirees of the United States by improving their working conditions, advancing their opportunities for profitable employment, protecting their retirement and health care benefits, helping employers find workers, strengthening free collective bargaining, and tracking changes in employment, prices and other national economic measurements.
In carrying out this mission, the Department administers a variety of federal labor laws including those that guarantee workers' rights to safe and healthful working conditions; a minimum hourly wage and overtime pay; freedom from employment discrimination; unemployment insurance; and other income support.
As we prepare to enter the 21st century, the Department will ensure that it has an effective strategy for improving the lives of America's working families and retirees.
We will assist all workers in their efforts to achieve economic security with rising wages, pensions, health benefits, and opportunities to improve their skills in safe and healthful workplaces free from discrimination.
The Department will encourage every workplace to support families, respect diversity, and foster cooperation between employers and workers.
Our challenge will be to assist those trying to enter the workforce to get good jobs, to expand opportunity and security for all workers, and to maintain our pre-eminence in the broad field of labor economics and statistics.
The steps taken today to prepare the workforce will determine America's leadership in the next century.
Working with public, private, and non-profit partners to achieve common goals, the Department will employ flexible, innovative, and coordinated responses to meet our challenges and to provide all working families with opportunity, security, and quality workplaces.
The Department's mission is carried out by nine major agencies and 14 staff and program support agencies reporting to the Secretary of Labor.
Department of Labor employees are located in a network of 960 national, regional, and field offices in 577 locations throughout the United States and its territories.
The programs with the largest annual budgets--funding Unemployment Insurance operations and job training programs -- are carried out under Departmental direction primarily by state and local governments, their contractors and grantees.
With the arrival of Secretary Herman in FY 1997, the Department refined its goals and priorities to better meet the needs of America’s working men and women in the new century.
While the original purpose of the 1913 Act establishing the Department remains the central tenet for the Department’s programs, The Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) provided an opportunity to develop a modern framework for meeting the challenges of helping every American participate and prosper in today’s highly competitive global economy.
GPRA has provided a valuable set of tools to enhance the Department’s program and managerial effectiveness.
Our work—and this report— is organized around Secretary Herman’s three strategic goals.
Within each strategic goal, specific outcome goals further define the Department’s major programs, as displayed below.
The first annual performance report under GPRA will cover FY 1999 performance, and will be published in March, 2000.
This report identifies our FY 1999 performance measures and provides FY 1998 data in those programs for which baseline information is available.
For some DOL agencies, the FY 1999 measures represent either new programs or newly adopted measures for which baseline data is under development.
In these programs, a more general description of program accomplishments in FY 1998 is provided.
The section of this report on maintaining a Departmental Strategic Management Focus (pages 54-75) provides a listing of the Department’s FY 1999 performance measures and related FY 1998 activity.
FY 1998 has been a year of transition for DOL to refocus the context of the Department's programs from a traditional Agency structure to one that aligns with the Secretary's Three Cross-Cutting Goals.
Accordingly, the program accomplishments which follow are not addressed by DOL component agency, but instead are presented within this three goal framework.
Major workforce legislation, the Workforce Investment Act, was signed by the President on August 7, 1998, provides a framework for reforming the national workforce preparation and employment system, and designing it to meet the needs of employers, job seekers, and those who want to further their careers.
The DOL Budget for FY 1998 reflects the highly decentralized nature of the Department's major programs.
The majority of Benefit Payments are made by State Employment Security agencies for unemployment compensation.
Most grant expenditures are made to state and local entities carrying out unemployment insurance, employment services, and job training programs.
Figure 3 Major budget categories for the Department of Labor.
The Department of Labor is committed to creating an environment where those new to the labor force or those wishing to improve their earnings potential are provided the assistance and tools needed to achieve success in today's job market.
Also included are the departmental programs directed toward those seeking information for making sound economic decisions.
The Secretary of Labor's key priorities for this strategic goal are to provide opportunities for individuals to obtain the skills necessary to succeed in the global economy, close the employment gap for out-of-school youth, and increase the number of long-term jobs for people as they move from Welfare-to-Work.
Agencies and programs which support this strategic goal include the Employment and Training Administration (ETA); the Employment Service; One-Stop Career Centers; the Welfare-to-Work Jobs Program; Job Training Program Partnership Act (and Work Force Investment Act successor) programs; the Veterans' Employment and Training Service; the Office of the Solicitor of Labor; and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
ETA and its partners and stakeholders have long accepted the importance of achieving performance goals and increasing customer satisfaction.
To this end, we continue moving toward a new workforce development system that provides greater State and local flexibility and, more importantly, provides easier access for all job seekers, employers, and others to get job skills and career information.
Information on the eligibility requirements for programs in the community, testing and assessment services, and help with job searches are also available through the system.
ETA places a high priority on measuring and improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its employment and training programs, and routinely provides feedback to its State and local partners on their performance.
For some time, ETA has been investing in management information which provides information on client characteristics, the services they receive, and the effect of services in terms of employment, earnings, and educational attainments.
This information helps to assess progress in achieving program goals, and also enable States and local programs to compare performance results and set performance benchmarks.
Providing critical performance feedback to States is essential to promoting continuous improvement.
Each year Governors have received performance "report cards" on each local JTPA service delivery area which give States an idea of how their programs "stack up" nationally on performance results as well as on those factors that may affect results - the local economy and the client groups being served.
Each local program is ranked on each performance measure, giving the State some indication of how much improvement will be needed before a local program is considered to be among the "best in the business."
Although ETA believes it has good performance measures for some of its programs, more needs to be done to provide valid, reliable data on program outcomes to the Congress and the American taxpayer.
An OIG audit and related Federal Manager's Financial Integrity Act reporting have identified the need to improve performance measurement in ETA programs through design and adoption of a system that better fosters accountability, measures return on investment, focuses on outcomes and moves toward fewer-but more cross-cutting--program measures.
ETA's Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plan for FY 1999 outline the strategies and resources needed to ensure that high-quality performance management and measurement plans are implemented at the Federal, State and local levels.
In FY 1998, ETA implemented a Standardized Participant Information Report (SPIR) for Titles II and III of JTPA, initiated a series of pilot studies to identify practical problems associated with using Unemployment Insurance wage record data for performance standards, and developed a list of conceptual measures for assessing system-wide performance.
With the enactment of the Workforce Investment Act, which calls for a comprehensive accountability system focusing on results and continuous improvement, agency efforts will be greatly enhanced and in FY 1999 will implement a new reporting and measurement system.
This system provides employment and training assistance to disadvantaged, low-income individuals and veterans who have been unsuccessful in forming long term job and career attachments.
The Department oversees and monitors its employment and training programs in partnership with States and local communities through an evolving workforce investment system.
Two programs that address the outcome goal of "increasing employment, earnings, and assistance" are the Welfare-to-Work program and the JTPA Adult Training Grants.
The Welfare to Work Grants program, a two-year program which began in FY 1998, provides grants to States and local communities to provide job opportunities for the hard-to-employ recipients of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families.
The goal is to move them into unsubsidized employment, and thus achieve economic self-sufficiency.
The program was funded at $3 billion for FY 1998 and FY 1999 with 75% distributed to States in formula grants and 25% distributed through competitive grants to local governments, Private Industry Councils, and private entities.
In FY 1998, 48 States applied for and received formula grants totaling ETA and the Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) operate through a approximately $1.03 billion.
Six States did not apply.
In addition, 51 Competitive Grants were awarded totaling $199 million.
The balance of FY 1998 competitive grants funds will be awarded in FY 1999.
In FY 1999, approximately $1.03 billion will be available for State Formula Grants and ETA anticipates providing them to all States which received funding in FY 1998 as well as States applying for the first time.
Performance bonus grants ($100 million) to high performing States will be awarded in FY 2000.
The performance goal for FY 1999 for the Welfare-to-Work program that will contribute to “increased employment, earnings, and assistance” is for 56% of those completing Welfare-to-Work programs to be placed in unsubsidized employment.
No performance data are currently available for this measure.
Since the program is in the very early stages of implementation, States and competitive grantees are just beginning to enroll participants in their program.
The first round of financial reports for the Welfare to Work Grants program, including both the formula and competitive grants, will be available in 1999.
The elements for the participant reports have been published in the Federal Register for comment by the Department of Health and Human Services, which is responsible for the collection of these data for the formula grants portion of the program.
The list of elements, which will also be used by DOL for participant reporting in the competitive grants portion of the program, should be finalized in 1999 so that reporting can begin this year.
The Department provides employment and training assistance to eligible disadvantaged, low-income individuals who have been unsuccessful in forming long-term job and career attachments or who are on welfare, through a system of about 640 local, public-private partnerships (with some State variation for Welfare to Work grants based upon Governors’ discretion).
During Program Year (PY) 1997¹, approximately $895 million in Federal funds were distributed to State governments for this program.
By law, States retain twenty-three percent of the funds for Statewide activities and distribute the balance to the 640+ Service Delivery Areas (SDAs).
These programs offer basic skills and job training and support services.
For PY 1997, 66% of adult terminees were employed one quarter after program exit.
Average weekly earnings at follow-up were $322 in PY 1997.
The performance goal for FY 1999 for the Adult Training Grants program that will contribute to “increased employment, earnings, and assistance” is for 64% of JTPA adult disadvantaged terminees to be employed one quarter after program exit with average weekly earnings of $292.
FY 1999 funds finance activities during the program year beginning July, 1999 and ending June 2000.
The FY 1999 goals were based on PY 1996 experience, the last full ¹Most employment and training programs are forward-funded on a program year basis.
Appropriations are made nine months in advance of their availability.
This report provides information for Program Year 1997 which began in July 1997 and ended in June 1998.
The Department of Labor develops and promotes training and employment opportunities for the Nation's veterans with special emphasis placed on assisting disabled and Vietnam era veterans.
To help accomplish these goals, the Department administers two major veterans' programs through the Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS): the Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP) and the Local Veterans' Employment Representative (LVER) program.
In Fiscal Year 1998, $157 million was available to State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs) for staffing these two programs.
These funds were sufficient to fund about 1,413 DVOP and 1,309 LVER (Full time or half time) positions.
The Department also ensures SESAs' compliance with statutory mandates requiring priority be given to veterans for all services.
For FY 1998, the performance goal for grantees in the DVOP, and the LVER program, in conjunction with the Job Training Partnership Act, Title IV-C year for which data were available at the time 1999 goals were established, and will need to be reconsidered to reflect greater than expected accomplishments during PY 1997.
These grantee staff helped approximately 297,000 veterans into jobs during the program year.
The primary reason that the actual number was lower than the planned goal was due to a reduction in the number of DVOP/LVER staff available to serve veterans.
The mandate that requires SESAs to provide priority service to veterans augments the number of jobs provided by the DVOP and LVER programs.
In the year ending June 30, 1998, this priority translated into more than 492,000 veterans being helped into jobs.
This includes the 297,000 veterans cited above.
In Program Year 1997, State Employment Service (Job Service) agencies, including the DVOP/LVER staff, registered 1.85 million veterans.
A noteworthy accomplishment is the continuing relatively high proportion of special disabled veterans helped into jobs, 29.5% verses 28.2% in the previous year, which exceeds the entered employment rate achieved for all veterans, 26.6% verses 25.1% in the previous year.
In addition to the continuing priority given to service-connected disabled veterans, a specific performance goal for VETS is to reduce National unemployment totals for veterans who are female, black, Hispanic, Native American, Asian-American, young (age 20-24), special disabled and disabled, and economically disadvantaged by at least 5% through FY 2002.
Unemployment data for 1997 (displayed above) shows which of these groups had lower unemployment numbers than the baseline year.
VETS will pay particular attention to unemployment rates for these groups in the coming year, and will modify guidance to SESAs to increase emphasis on services to these groups.
A variety of interventions address basic and intensive education, training, career preparation and job needs of primarily disadvantaged youth and low-income youth, but also in-school youth needing to prepare for the world of work.
The goal of these programs is employment in jobs that will provide a long-term career path, to return youth to complete education programs already started or advance their education, or to provide job and work related skills that will prepare youth for the rapidly changing labor market.
DOL programs addressing the outcome goal of “assisting youth in making the transition to work” are the JTPA Title II-C Youth Training Grants; the Job Corps program, the School-to-Work initiative; and the Youth Opportunity Areas program.
During PY 1997, ending June 30, 1998, approximately $ 126.7 million in Federal funds were distributed to State governments to provide training and other services to economically disadvantaged youth.
By law, States retain 18% of the Youth funds for Statewide activities, and distribute the balance to the 640+ Service Delivery Areas (SDAs).
These programs offer basic skills, job training, and support services.
The Entered Employment Rate for youth exiting from the JTPA Title II-C program in PY 1997 was 55%.
The performance goal for FY 1999 for the JTPA Title II-C Youth Training Grants program that will contribute to “assisting youth in making the transition to work” is for 77% of JTPA Title II-C terminees to be employed or obtain advanced education or job skills.
In the upcoming year, the Department will be developing a short-term strategy to maximize coordination among the current ETA programs serving out-of-school youth to effectively utilize shrinking resources and foster arrangements under new workforce development legislation.
Beginning July 1, 1999, States may elect to continue to operate programs under the Job Training Partnership Act or may begin under the Workforce Investment Act.
Special emphasis will also include placing youth into private sector employment or returning them back to school by employing a variety of approaches to job training, including on-the-job training, occupational training based on successful models, and work experience programs.
Local areas will have discretion about the combinations of job training and job development strategies.
The Department of Labor’s Job Corps program is a highly intensive, primarily residential training program for severely disadvantaged youth aged 16 through 24.
Enrollees are offered housing, food, medical care, education, vocational training and supportive services.
The program prepares youth for stable, productive employment, and/or entrance into vocational and technical schools, junior colleges and other institutions for further education and training.
In PY 1997, $1.154 billion was available to fund Job Corps centers; of this amount, a total of $137.6 million was transferred to the Departments of Agriculture and Interior to operate 18 and 10 Job Corps Centers, respectively.
Job Corps utilizes a highly structured and integrated performance measurement system to drive the performance of its contractors toward meeting the program results which translate into positive outcomes for the students served by the program.
In PY 1997, 80% of all Job Corps trainees either entered employment or pursued further education.
The average starting wage of Job Corps students who entered employment was $6.58 per hour.
The PY 1997 performance compares favorably with the PY 1995 baseline for Job Corps which established that 75% of Job Corps terminees got jobs or pursued education and that for those with jobs, the average wage was $5.98.
The performance goal for PY 1999 for the Job Corps program which support the Secretary’s broad goal for a Prepared Workforce is that 75% of Job Corps trainees would obtain employment or advanced education upon leaving the program, and those obtaining jobs would have an average starting wage of $6.50 per hour.
These goals will be reconsidered given the higher expected 1997 results.
For FY 1999, DOL is committed to increasing employer connections with Job Corps students through offers of customized training, use of mentors and job shadowing, and provision of work-based learning sites.
Increasing students’ use of technology in training and in information access for jobs or further education is another area of emphasis in the upcoming year.
In past years, financial statement audits have reported numerous issues related to ETA’s accounting of Job Corps’ real and personal property.
The systems used by ETA consist of manual spreadsheets, which are updated and recorded in the general ledger at year end only and are not reconcilable to the cost reports submitted by Job Corps’ contractors.
In FY 1999, ETA plans to implement and integrate the construction-in-progress module into the Departmentwide Capitalized Asset Tracking and Reporting System, resulting in a fully integrated subsidiary ledger supporting the Department’s general ledger.
The ETA staff is addressing OIG audit recommendations to improve the effectiveness of the Job Corps experience for disadvantaged youth and to maintain effective GPRA program measurement.
The Job Corps’ Student Payroll and Management Information System has greatly improved the accuracy and efficiency of the payment process and is a reliable base for trainee information.
The School-to-Work Opportunities Act established a national framework within which all States can create statewide School-to-Work Opportunities systems for students to participate in a performance-based education and training program that prepares them for high-skill, high-wage careers.
The STW initiative provides venture capital to support States in building a STW system.
In FY 1998, the STW initiative was funded at $200 million through the DOL and $200 million through the Department of Education.
As of September 30, 1998, all 50 States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico have been awarded multi-year School-to-Work grants to implement STW systems that comply with the criteria embodied in the STW legislation.
For FY 1996, ending June 30, 1997 (the most recent available data), 1,265,549 secondary school students were participating in STW programs – activities that integrate academic and vocational/work-related curriculum.
This performance exceeded the baseline of 700,000 students engaged in STW activities in FY 1995.
The STW performance goal for FY 1999 is to engage 1.5 million youth in School-to-Work activities.
Since the inception of this program, DOL, together with the Department of Education have provided assistance to State and local partnerships and expanded employer participation by working with the National Employer Leadership Council and other groups.
In FY 1999, the two Departments will be focusing on five key areas: (1) risk management including intensive site visits to all STW grantees; (2) in-depth technical assistance; (3) ensuring sustainability of investments; (4) benchmarking performance; and (5) developing public outreach strategies, particularly ones that are targeted to parents.
A significant amount of staff time will be devoted to assisting grantees efforts to increase employer involvement in STW and to conduct outreach activities to out-of-school youth.
Investments will also be targeted to strengthening the linkages between STW and other Federal initiatives such as welfare reform and newly designed State workforce investment systems.
Additionally, the electronic America’s Career Kit software (AJB, ATB, ACIN, Learning Exchange and O*NET) will be customized to support the special needs of the out-of-school youth population.
The Youth Opportunity Program is a Secretarial initiative under Title IV-D of JTPA scheduled to begin in 1999.
It is anticipated that 15 to 20 grants will be awarded in the first quarter of PY 1999 in an effort to reduce the pervasive joblessness of youth in high poverty areas and to close the employment gap between minority and other youth.
Technical assistance and evaluation will also be integral parts of this broadly-based initiative.
The FY99 performance goal for the Youth Opportunities program is for 25,000 youth to be served in Youth Opportunity Areas during the initial year of program operations.
Since FY 1999 will be the first year of operation of the Youth Opportunity Area program, there are no related data for establishing a baseline; and it is anticipated that FY 1999 performance will be used to establish a baseline for out years.
The One-Stop Career Centers are designed to transform a fragmented array of employment and training programs and services into an integrated and information-rich service delivery system.
One-Stop transformation means that individual offices offer all the business lines or “core services” to its customers (i.e., labor exchange services, income maintenance, job search assistance, individual intensive services, training and labor market information).
The Workforce Investment Act reforms this nation's workforce preparation and employment system by enabling customers to obtain access to information and services through the "one-stop" centers.
DOL also plans to make efforts to ensure that women, mostly mothers who are on public assistance, transition successfully into the workplace by increasing the availability of information to working women, employers, and public and private organizations to assist them in developing the most efficient workforce development initiatives.
The Employment Service (ES) program seeks to match individuals seeking employment with employers seeking workers.
It is funded primarily through Federal unemployment taxes paid into the Unemployment Trust Fund.
The fifty states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and Guam operate ES programs under the authority of the Wagner-Peyser Act, as amended in the Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
State Employment Services also administer programs such as the Alien Labor Certification program and the Work Opportunity Tax Credit through reimbursement agreements with the Department of Labor.
In PY 1997, States received $761.7 million for ES operations.
This funding level remained unchanged from PY 1996.
During PY 1997, the number of individuals entering employment increased by 1.1% to 3.3 million.
The number of applicants seeking employment services fell to 17.8 million in PY 1997 from 18.4 million in PY 1996.
This is likely due to a tight labor market, nationwide, and greater use of America’s Job Bank by individuals.
Employers posted many more jobs with the States’ ES offices in PY 1997 than in the previous program year, an increase of 8.6% to 6.5 million.
The Electronic Labor Exchange is becoming an increasingly important part of the labor exchange system, with employers listing 1,585,145 jobs on America’s Job Bank via the Internet during PY 1997.
The total of 8.1 million job postings is an increase of 15.7% over the PY 1996/FY 1997 baseline of 7 million jobs.
Performance goals for FY 1999 for ES programs that will contribute to “providing information and tools about work” are: * to increase the number of individuals entering employment after receiving labor exchange services beyond registration by 1%, and * to increase the number of total job openings listed with the public employment service by 20%.
The Employment Service/One Stop system is designed to transform a fragmented array of employment and training programs into an integrated information-job service delivery system, a basic component of the evolving workforce investment system.
One-Stop transformation means that individual offices offer all the business lines or “core services” to their customers.
Under the new Workforce Investment Act, this One-Stop service delivery will unify numerous training, education and employment programs into a single, customer-friendly system.
The Department views the One-Stop and America’s Labor Market Information System (ALMIS) investments as critical contributions to the early success of the implementation of the Act.
The budget for One-Stop Career Centers and America’s Labor Market Information System (ALMIS) for PY 1998 was $150 million.
All States have now been awarded One-Stop implementation grants.
Data shows the goal of operating 1,000 One-Stop Career Centers was met in PY 1998.
A reporting system is currently being designed to address the percentage of local ES and JTPA SDA offices operating One-Stops in the upcoming program year.
In the new Workforce Investment system, each local area is required to establish a One-Stop delivery system to provide customers with information about and access to job training, education and employment services at a single neighborhood location.
This goal will be revised for FY 2000.
The Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data plays a large and important role in the development of other Federal statistics including the Gross Domestic Product and other key economic indicators.
The Congress, President, Federal Reserve Board, and other executive branch agencies use these statistics in determining national economic policy.
BLS data are also used by industry and labor in economic planning and collective bargaining and by other public and private institutions in a variety of planning and analytical activities.
In addition, BLS data directly affect the economy.
For example, the Consumer Price Index is used to adjust Social Security and Federal civilian and military retirement payments.
The goal of the Employment and Unemployment Statistics program is to analyze and publish accurate data on the labor force, employment and unemployment, and persons not in the labor force; labor market developments; characteristics of special worker groups, including displaced workers; and detailed employment and wage data by occupation and industry.
The Employment and Unemployment Statistics program also maintains an up-to-date "universe" file of establishments covered by the State Unemployment Insurance system, which the Department of Labor uses to select samples for its establishment-based surveys.
In 1998, the Current Employment Statistics (CES) program completed the first year of a production test designed to begin the implementation of an improved, probability-based sample design and estimation formulas.
The new design, which will be phased in for publication purposes over the next several years, will improve the reliability of the employment, hours, and earnings estimates from the CES.
The Department of Labor continued implementing the standard industrial classification revision known as the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
The goals of the Prices and Living Conditions programs are to develop and to publish comprehensive measures of price change in retail and primary markets, and to conduct research to improve the measurement process.
The data provide the essential elements to analyze price behavior and interpret price change throughout the U.S. economy.
In 1998, the BLS continued work on five major projects in the seven-year revision of the Consumer Price Index and began implementing a multi-year effort to improve the timeliness and accuracy of the Consumer Price Index.
The goals of the Compensation and Working Conditions program are: to study employee compensation using a broad range of data on workers' wages and salaries in many occupations, industries, and geographic areas; to develop information on employee benefits and the costs employers incur in providing those benefits; to compile statistics on the occurrence of work-related occupational injuries and illnesses; and to publish data on collective bargaining and labor management relations.
In 1998, considerable progress was made toward the goal of integrating three existing compensation surveys — the Occupational Compensation Survey Program, the Employment Cost Index, and the Employee Benefits Survey — into a single survey program, the National Compensation Survey (NCS).
The goals of the Productivity and Technology program are, in the domestic area, to measure and analyze productivity trends in major sectors of the economy and in individual industries; and, in the international area, to develop comparable measures of productivity, labor force, employment and unemployment, hourly compensation costs, and other economic indicators for selected countries.
The goals of the Employment Projections program are to develop information about the labor market 10 years into the future, including labor force trends by sex, race, and age; employment trends by industry and occupation; and the implications of these trends on employment opportunities and education and training needs for youth and other specific groups in the population.
In 1998, the Department of Labor completed and published 1996-2006 projections of the labor force, economic trends, and employment by industry and occupation.
The Secretary of Labor’s key priorities for this strategic goal are to increase compliance with minimum wage and overtime requirements, enable working Americans to be economically secure by expanding, enhancing, and protecting workers’ and retirees’ pension, health care, and other benefits, and facilitate community readjustment in those areas suffering from economic change by shortening periods of unemployment and increasing full-time jobs and wage replacement.
This goal is supported by programs of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC); Pension Welfare and Benefits Administration (PWBA); ETA’s Unemployment Compensation programs; Trade Adjustment Assistance and North American Free Trade Agreement (JTPA) and Dislocated Worker Assistance; the Office of the Inspector General; the Office of the Solicitor of Labor; and the Employment Standards Administration’s Wage and Hour Division, Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs, and Office of Labor Management Programs.
DOL is committed to protecting worker’s hours, wages, and other conditions when on the job.
This includes enforcement and compliance activities designed to deter and correct violations of relevant statutes; investigating and referring criminal violations to prosecutorial authorities; ensuring that annual reports are filed timely and accurately; and ensuring that audits of employee benefit plans comply with professional standards.
The Wage and Hour Division’s overall compliance program balances public education and outreach with enforcement efforts using a variety of techniques.
In the last several years, Wage and Hour has increased the proportion of compliance efforts in “directed” or “targeted” investigations – as opposed to complaint-based investigations – from approximately 25 to 30 percent.
Targeted (i.e., non-complaint) investigations are used primarily to promote compliance and deter and remedy violations in predominately low-wage industries (or industries which have low-wage occupations) – such as agriculture, garment, guard and janitorial services, restaurants, hotels/motels, and health care – because violations are more often egregious and complaints less common in these areas.
Several strategies are used to focus program efforts on achieving these Departmental and supporting program goals: (1) Establish compliance baselines with labor standards laws and regulations in the poultry processing and residential health care industry; (2) Increase compliance in the Los Angeles garment industry to 55%; (3) Improve compliance rates among employers subject to repeat investigations in targeted residential health care and garment industries; and (4) Establish baseline of valid complaints regarding the accuracy of wage determination rates on the four types of construction covered by the Davis-Bacon Act.
Some of the strategies to achieve these goals include: * establishing compliance baselines in selected low-wage industries through compliance surveys and re-surveys over a two or three year cycle to determine if education/outreach and enforcement strategies and interventions are improving compliance and reducing recidivism; * developing public and private partnerships to leverage action by others to promote corporate-wide compliance; * litigating actively and, where possible, initiating criminal prosecution of egregious violators; * reengineering the Davis-Bacon wage survey/determination system to obtain more appropriate sources for and improved accuracy of wage data; and, * providing information to employers concerning their responsibilities, and to workers concerning their rights under the laws administered by Wage and Hour.
Establish compliance baselines with labor standards laws and regulations in the poultry processing and residential health care industries.
Wage and Hour conducted a baseline compliance survey in the poultry processing industry, which established a 40% compliance rate.
Preliminary results of the health care baseline survey of assisted-living facilities completed in the fourth quarter of FY 1997 indicate a 56% compliance rate.
This rate may change somewhat as the results of the survey are analyzed in more detail.
Increase compliance in the Los Angeles garment industry to 55%.
The baseline compliance rate for the garment manufacturing industry in Los Angeles was determined to be 22 % in FY 1994.
This industry was surveyed again in FY 1996, finding that the rate of compliance had increased by 17 percentage points, to 39%.
Although there was a considerable increase in compliance between FY 1994 and FY 1996, the FY 1998 survey showed compliance remained at 39 %.
In October 1998, the Department announced enhancements to its multi-prong "No Sweat" strategy aimed to improve the level of compliance in the Nation's garment industry.
Improve compliance rates among employers subject to repeat investigations in targeted residential health care and garment industries.
The residential health care compliance survey, completed in FY 1998, shows that 60% of the residential care facilities previously found in violation and reinvestigated were in compliance, a substantial improvement in compliance, but a 40 % recidivism rate.
The 1998 compliance survey of the Los Angeles garment industry found that only 25% of the garment shops previously found in violation and reinvestigated were in compliance – a 75% recidivism rate.
Establish baseline of valid complaints regarding the accuracy of wage determination rates on the four types of construction covered by the Davis-Bacon Act.
During FY 1998, there were no valid complaints regarding the accuracy of wage determination rates on the four types of construction covered by the Davis-Bacon Act.
As the reengineering of the Davis-Bacon wage determination process becomes operational, Wage and Hour will, in conformance with its strategic plan, measure the accuracy and timeliness of wage determinations.
Wage and Hour’s Back Wage System Improvements Needed:* Previous audits in FY 1993, 1996 and 1997 noted that the Wage and Hour Division (WHD) does not maintain sufficient control over information recorded in the back wage subsidiary system (Back Wage Collection and Disbursement System - BCDS), and certain policies and practices exercised by the regional offices preclude the use of this system as a reliable subsidiary for back wages.
In response to the FY 1997 report, WHD indicated that they would redesign the BCDS to ensure that it meets all financial management and accounting standards.
WHD plans to complete a detailed design in the third quarter of FY 1999, which will also consider the possibility of outsourcing the entire process.
Data Quality Control in Civil Monetary Penalties System (CMP):* In an FY 1993 audit, the Office of the Inspector General recommended the installation of a CMP tracking system which would function as a subsidiary for CMP activity and related receivable balances.
A new CMP system is substantially complete; with the exception of reports and the general ledger interface.
In the spring of 1998, James had a good job that provided health care coverage for himself and his family.
His health insurance coverage was provided through his employer's group health plan and was of critical importance to him and his family since his young son Steve has a terminal degenerative disease which left him paralyzed from the waist down.
In March of 1998, James learned that the health insurance coverage he had relied upon was being canceled at the end of the month, and he would be responsible for paying the medical costs associated with his son's terminal disease.
James could not afford to pay for the medical treatment that his son could not live without.
With his insurance coverage coming to an end, James contacted the Department's PWBA Health Care Task Force for some assistance.
After reviewing the details of his situation, the Task Force concluded that the recently enacted Health Insurance Portability Accountability Act (HIPAA) amendments to ERISA, as administered by the Department of Labor, would help James and his family by prohibiting his employer from canceling his health insurance coverage.
Through the Task Force's efforts, James and his family were able to keep the health insurance coverage they could not live without.
Back wages collected are held in a special deposit account for a period of time prescribed by law, after which they revert to Treasury.
Although significant progress has been made in reverting funds to Treasury, as of September, approximately $800,000 due to be distributed to employees (primarily from the San Francisco and Philadelphia regions) that should have been reverted to the U.S. Treasury was still on deposit.
The Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits administration has four goals in support of the Department's plan: (1) deter and correct violations of the relevant statutes; (2) facilitate compliance; (3) assist workers in understanding their rights and protecting their benefits; and (4) encourage the growth of employment-based benefits.
For the following program measures, performance met or exceeded established standards in FY 1998.
Respond within an average of 10 working days to all requests for plan documents, annual reports and other information maintained for public disclosure.
Provide timely assistance to participants and beneficiaries (85% within 30 days for written requests and 99% by close of business the next day for telephone requests).
Provide policy and technical assistance to the Office of the Solicitor necessary to the development of "friend of the court" briefs within 10 days of the request date.
Increase by 2.5% per year the number of closed investigations of plans where assets are restored and where prohibited transactions are reversed.
Increase by 2.5% per year the number of fiduciary investigations closed where plan assets are protected from mismanagement and risk of future loss is reduced.
Increase by .25% per year the ratio of closed civil cases with corrected violations to total civil cases closed.
Increase by .25% per year the ratio of criminal cases referred for prosecution to United States Attorneys or to State prosecutors to total criminal cases.
Further, the important qualitative goal "to conduct research responsive to developing issues" was met by undertaking studies on retirement savings behavior, the small group health insurance market, and ERISA remedies or liability reform.
During FY 1998, the National Office and field offices for the Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits programs assessed civil penalties of more than $13.9 million.
Tim could not believe that his health insurance company would cancel his organization's health insurance coverage after providing health insurance coverage to the organization's members and their families for many years.
The insurance company made a 'business decision' to cancel the health coverage which affected 500 covered individuals, including one individual who was scheduled to have brain surgery.
Tim contacted many consumer advocacy groups and was eventually referred to PWBA's Health Care Task Force.
Members of the Task Force worked with Tim and facilitated discussions with the DC Insurance Department.
The Task Force worked with the DC Insurance Department to identify potential violations of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.
HIPAA was enacted to prevent such cancellations and to protect individuals by requiring insurance companies to renew health insurance coverage even when an individual is sick or has a pre-existing condition.
On December 1, 1998, the DC Insurance Department ordered the insurance company to renew the organization's health insurance coverage.
The insurance company was required to notify each covered individual that his or her coverage would not be canceled.
As a result, 500 individuals covered by the organization's health plan, were able to keep their health insurance coverage.
The program-specific measure of civil cases opened increased for the fifth consecutive year to 5,858 cases, up from 2,329 in FY 1994.
In FY 1998, the number of civil cases referred for litigation increased to 164, compared to 128 in the prior year.
Assistance to participants markedly increased with benefit recoveries for plan participants reaching $42 million compared to $27.9 million in FY 1997 and $14 million in FY 1994.
The exemption program facilitates meritorious investment transactions for pension plans which would otherwise be prohibited under ERISA.
During FY 1998, approximately 35 of the 190 exemption cases that were closed were highly complex, requiring careful attention to develop appropriate safeguards and conditions to address any potential conflicts of interest.
Some of these cases were well over one year old.
Continuing to eliminate the more complex cases from the inventory is a necessary step which should yield results in reduced average processing time for the coming years.
Regarding the decrease in monetary assets restored to benefit plans, in FY 1998 DOL closed more cases with fiduciary results than in any of the previous five fiscal years while total monetary recoveries decreased.
This result is consistent with a major commitment in our enforcement strategy to look into every complaint received about 401 (k) plans.
As a general rule, investigations of 401 (k) plans resulted in smaller monetary recoveries compared to the other types of investigations which we conducted in previous fiscal years.
The policy was to provide oversight to these plans, although the return is not as great as with other types of investigations.
The Department will continue to pursue legislative action to bring a long-standing audit to closure.
Both the GAO and OIG have identified the limited scope of the audit provision of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) as a major program issue, as the Act does not provide adequate coverage for the audit of certain pension plans.
In the judgment of the GAO and OIG, enactment of legislation broadening the scope of certain pension plan audit requirements is needed.
This issue has been reported in the Department's Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act report and depends upon Congressional legislative action for resolution.
Under GPRA, the Department monitors its performance in enforcing provisions of the Labor-Management Standards Act against several goals critical to its statutory mission.
For FY 1998, these performance goals were to ensure that: (1) 84% of annual financial reports required from unions with annual receipts over $200,000 were timely filed, processed, and made available for public disclosure; (2) a significant percentage would rate the public disclosure services good to excellent (baseline performance data to be established by customer survey in FY 1998); and (3) 100% of employee protection certifications for the release of grant funds would be completed within 60 days of referral.
Eighty-four percent of annual financial reports required from unions with annual receipts of over $200,000 will be timely filed, processed, and made available for public disclosure.
The goal was substantially achieved in FY 1998.
Among unions with receipts over $200,000 required to file Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) annual financial reports, 83.4% filed on time, an improvement over the 79.4 % timely filing rate in FY 1997.
To further improve results and meet the FY 1999 objective of an 85% timely filing rate, the Department will continue compliance assistance and liaison efforts to promote timely reporting compliance.
These efforts will include an initiative that focuses on unions whose reports were delinquent in the prior year and special liaison contacts with international unions to seek their assistance in securing timely reporting compliance by affiliates.
Customer Service.
More than 96% of customers surveyed rated LMRDA public disclosure services good to excellent, establishing a very high performance benchmark for the future and providing public comment that will be used to improve performance where needed.
One hundred percent of employee protection certifications for the release of grant funds will be completed within 60 days of referral.
Under the Transportation Equity Act program, 98% of employee protection certifications were completed within the established 60-day time frame, and all but 23 of the 994 certifications issued.
Those not completed within 60 days were delayed because of case complexity and workload factors.
Certifications issued were issued within an average of 22 days in FY 1998.
Even at this high level of performance, which ensures expeditious handling of urban mass transit employee protections certifications, it is recognized that attainment of the 100% performance level may be impractical.
This goal is under review for the future.
The Department’s strategies to improve performance against these goals for FY 1999 and beyond include focused enforcement and compliance assistance objectives, and initiatives to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of program implementation.
DOL plays a large role in ensuring that worker benefits are protected and that employers administer benefit programs in an appropriate way.
Worker benefits include: unemployment insurance, which provides temporary income to individuals who lose their jobs; support for dislocated workers who lose their jobs due to downsizing, layoffs, natural disasters, or international trade issues; health and pension benefit programs administered according to relevant statutes; and payment of benefits from DOL administered pension plans.
The Department’s Unemployment Insurance (UI) program establishes the first economic line of defense for workers who lose their jobs through no fault of their own.
Authorized by the Social Security Act of 1935, UI was created as a means to alleviate personal hardship due to involuntary unemployment and to stabilize the economy.
The UI system is a unique Federal-State partnership based on Federal law but executed through State law by State officials.
It is funded through employer taxes that are maintained in the Unemployment Trust Fund (UTF).
Basic benefits for unemployment compensation are financed by State taxes on employer payrolls, while Federal agencies finance benefits for the unemployment compensation programs for ex-federal workers (UCFE) and ex-service members (UCX).
Program administration expenses are financed through the collection of Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) taxes by the Internal Revenue Service.
During FY 1998, a total of $2.480 billion was provided to the State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs) for State administration.
During this period, 7.3 million beneficiaries qualified for weeks compensated amounting to $19.821 billion.
Claimants for UI benefits are provided services by 53 SESAs through the operation of approximately 1,700 local UI claims offices and 20 call centers.
The SESAs are responsible for both the payment of UI benefits and the collection of UI taxes from all liable/subject employers.
The SESAs are also responsible for meeting performance standards set by the Secretary of Labor in two areas: first payment timeliness of UI benefits and decision promptness of UI appeals.
The Secretary’s standards are: will be made within 14 days of the first compensable week ending date in States with a waiting period and within 21 days in States without a waiting period.
70% of initial interstate payments will be made within 14 days of the first compensable week ending date in States with a waiting period, and within 21 days in States without a waiting period.
60% of lower authority appeals decisions will be rendered within 30 days and 80% within 45 days.
The FY 1998 SESA performance data in these areas are: 90.3% for intrastate payments; 79.0% for interstate payments; 67.4% of lower authority appeals decisions rendered within 30 days; and 85.2% within 45 days.
FY 1998 performance data also measured the national Average Weekly Benefit Amounts (AWBA) received by all claimants for regular State UI, UCFE, and UCX.
The AWBA was $193 in FY 1998.
All facets of the measures of the Secretary’s Standards are scheduled to be validated through the UI Data Validation program, starting in FY 2000.
During FY 1997, the Office of the Inspector General noted that the Advisory Council on Unemployment Compensation (ACUC), required by section 908 of the Social Security Act, had not been reestablished.
The current audit found that a new ACUC had still not been established nor had a time frame been provided as to when another council would be discussed or established.
ETA and the Department of the Treasury have implemented a new on-line system for the drawdown of funds and developed Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA) regulations addressing the UTF.
The Department's Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act report covers ETA's plans to develop regulations governing unemployment fund cash management to complement the CMIA regulations.
Documentation required for UTF Administrative Costs: ETA needs supporting data to document that DOL's administrative charges to the UTF represent actual expenditures in accordance with the budget.
While the implementation of instructions issued by the OCFO began in FY 1997, an OIG audit reports that completion of the corrective action plan is dependent on all agencies properly implementing the instructions.
Investment Interest Receivable Accruals Need Better Monitoring: UTF interest receivable accruals were calculated by Treasury and entered in the Department's general ledger without review by ETA or the OCFO.
As of September 30, 1998, interest receivables totaled $1.2 billion.
Although Treasury has custodial authority over UTF investments, the Department of Labor, through agreement with Treasury, has assumed budgetary and reporting responsibility for UTF balances.
The OIG has recommended controls be put in place to assure management that recorded transactions by Treasury are correct.
Completing the Federal Employees Unemployment Compensation System: In previous audits of the UTF, recommendations were made to establish an accounting system for the Federal Employment Compensation (FEC) Account.
Management anticipates the integration of the FEC accounting system with the Department's general ledger to be completed by the end of FY 1999.
SESA Real Property: In prior years, ETA also did not maintain sufficient accountability over real property purchased with State Employment Security Agencies (SESA) grant funds in which the Department maintains a reversionary interest.
ETA established a position to monitor and develop written guidance for recording of SESA real property.
However, ETA still cannot provide a complete and up-to-date SESA inventory list or state certifications of SESA real property.
ETA is currently updating the SESA real property inventory list and obtaining state certifications.
The Department of Labor administers three primary disability compensation programs that provide benefits to certain workers who experience work-related injury or disease, and survivors of employees who die from job-related injuries or diseases.
Compensation for most private-sector workers suffering job-related injuries is administered by state agencies.
In FY 1998, the Department issued compensation payments of more than $2.5 billion in medical and wage-loss benefits to nearly 314,000 workers who had been hurt or became ill on the job or to the survivors of those who died.
These disability programs provide timely benefits for covered coal miners, longshore workers and Federal employees, and effective intervention for injured Federal employees to enable them to recover to the fullest extent possible.
The Department also manages benefit funds from which employee benefits are paid, ensuring the fund will be available for eligible employees.
The following program-based and Departmental level performance goals set specific achievement levels to be reached by the Year 2002: (1) Return employees to work following a work injury as early as appropriate, as measured by a reduction in the average number of lost production days of injured Federal employees covered under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) by 4%; (2) Reduce amount paid for FECA medical services by 4%; (3) Produce $40 million in FECA compensation benefit savings through Periodic Roll Management reviews; (4) Increase customer satisfaction with FECA and Longshore services by 10%; (5) Increase timeliness of new FECA claims filing by employing agencies by 16 percentage points; (6) Increase the quality of FECA claims adjudication by 8 percentage points, and (7) Provide the same level of service to Part B beneficiaries in the Black Lung benefits program that Part C beneficiaries currently receive by processing 95% of Part B maintenance actions within 30 days.
Strategies to achieve these goals include swift, clear decisions; reducing paperwork and procedural "steps"; reaching out to the customer with needed services; working effectively with employers and others to get injured workers back on the job; continuing the involvement of all employees in the achievement of these outcomes; and, upgraded technology, "paperless" claims and benefit processing.
All these lead to a better level of services for workers and lessened compensation costs for employers.
The Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) affords income and medical-cost protection for job-related injuries, diseases or deaths of civilian employees of the Federal government and certain other groups.
Benefits are charged back to Federal employers who pay from funds appropriated in their annual budgets or from operating revenues.
In FY 1998, FECA received 165,000 Federal employee injury reports.
Of this number, most were adjudicated timely—95.9% of traumatic injuries within 45 days, and 92% of the non-traumatic injury cases within 180 days.
Reducing lost production days (LPD) is FECA's most important goal.
This goal promotes Federal workforce security.
Its objective is to reduce disability due to work injury through better medical care, active intervention to return injured workers to work, and more efficient, less resource-intensive claims operations.
Average time loss from work within the first year of disability for cases measured under FECA's Quality Case Management program in the fourth quarter of FY 1998 was 184 days, a drop of 5 days compared to the average 189 days in FY 1997.
DOL has proposed as a joint OSHA/ESA-OWCP effort, a Presidential Initiative called Federal Worker 2000.
The goals will include reducing injuries and speeding reports of injuries that do occur, lowering injury rates in high incidence work sites, and lowering the lost production days average.
The latter measure will cover all injuries, for which FECA plans to establish a baseline for measuring all disability cases in FY 2000, in cooperation with all Federal employing agencies.
In FY 1998, the FECA program continued the Periodic Roll Management Project (PRM) which was aimed at quality management of the disability roll, improvement in service to long-term disabled beneficiaries, rehabilitation and reemployment of the partially disabled and adjustment of benefits to accurately reflect eligibility.
PRM project teams in eight district offices screened 4,500 long-term cases, bringing the total count of cases screened since April 1992 to 44,800.
By the end of FY 1998, 31% of those cases had benefits adjusted or terminated, and cumulative savings from these actions between FY 1992 and FY 1998 totaled $317 million.
PRM will be expanded and integrated into permanent FECA operations in FY 1999.
Use of a medical fee schedule has been successful in controlling physician and other non-inpatient medical costs.
In FY 1997, for example, the program reduced medical provider bills by $87 million using the fee schedule.
Savings in FY 1998 were approximately $112 million.
Effective on January 4, 1999, final regulations apply a fee schedule to pharmacy bills and regulate hospital inpatient services using the Diagnostic Related Group (DRG) approach adopted by HHS for Medicare bills.
Rising costs in the latter category have been the chief source of the recent overall increase in medical payments in the FECA program.
The Department continues to emphasize customer service and program responsiveness.
Some manual processes are being replaced by Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), including electronic receipt and processing of pharmacy (and soon hospital) bills, and soon injury reports and claims documentation.
Information is being more efficiently provided by electronic means.
The Automated Query System (AQS) enables Federal agencies to get information on their employees' claims.
OWCP's Interactive Voice Response (IVR) systems save staff time by accurately directing telephone callers and providing basic information.
Manual work will be reduced further in the future as document imaging technology converts paper case files to electronic form.
Further, the recently enacted regulations will cut red tape and eliminate unnecessary steps.
Another goal focuses on OWCP's relationship with Federal employers and their role in providing services to their injured employees by improving the timeliness of new injury claims filing.
Prompt injury reporting supports lost production days reduction and customer service improvement goals by speeding case processing and intervention by nurses so that injury recovery and return to work will occur sooner.
The quality of claims decisions goal strengthens program integrity and service delivery.
Expressed as a Quality Index score based upon the results of program accountability reviews, this indicator measures the accuracy of claims decisions affecting basic entitlement to benefits.
Average time-loss from work in new FECA disability cases dropped by 5 days during FY 1998".
FECA Program Management Issues Segregation of Duties: Claims examiners have the ability to change the address field in the payment system and can also initiate and compute payments.
Chargeback Accounting: Improvements are still needed in the reconciliation process between Treasury reports and the billings to other Federal agencies for Federal workers compensation benefits paid by DOL on their behalf.
Continuing Eligibility - SSA Earnings Confirmation: Improvements are still needed in obtaining earnings statements from the Social Security Administration; OWCP is working to obtain this information in an automated fashion.
Medical Bill Payment System (BPS): Improvements are still needed at the district offices to ensure that medical bills are keyed correctly.
Accounts Receivable: OWCP's debt management system includes inaccurate accounts receivable due to errors in recording overpayments and assessment of interest and other posting errors.
FECA Actuarial Model: FECA needs to complete the documentation of the FECA Actuarial model.
Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation The Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act authorizes medical benefits, compensation for lost-wages and rehabilitation services for job-related injuries, diseases or death of private-sector workers in certain maritime and related employment.
Benefits are paid directly from private funds by an authorized self-insured employer or through an authorized insurance carrier.
In certain cases, benefits are paid from a special fund composed primarily of employer contributions and administered by the Department.
In calendar year 1997, about 55,000 maritime workers or their survivors received benefits from employers.
At the end of FY 1998, 6,742 workers were receiving recurring compensation benefits from the Longshore Special Fund.
The Longshore program is committed to increasing customer satisfaction with its services as part of the GPRA strategic planning effort.
Customer survey results in FY 1997 provided a satisfaction baseline rating of 67 %, which increased to 70% in FY 1998.
Longshore Program Management Issues: In previous audits, weaknesses were identified in the internal controls for the reporting and authorization of payments to rehabilitation service providers.
The weaknesses pertain to the controls between the district offices’ submission of bills and the national office authorization for payment.
An automated system is being developed which should improve controls in this area.
The Black Lung Benefits program provides monetary compensation and medical benefits to coal miners who are totally disabled by pneumoconiosis caused by their employment and monetary benefits to their dependent survivors.
When no responsible mine operator can be assigned liability, or when coal mine employment ceased before 1970, benefits are paid from the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
Trust Fund revenues consist of monies collected from the coal mine industry in the form of an excise tax on mined coal that is sold; funds collected from responsible mine operators for monies they owe the Trust Fund; payments from various fines, penalties and interest; refunds collected from claimants and beneficiaries for overpayments; and repayable advances obtained from Treasury’s general fund when Trust Fund expenses exceed revenues.
While revenues from excise taxes and repayments from operators and claimants have been sufficient to cover benefit and operating costs in recent years, the Trust Fund debt continues to grow as advances from the general fund are needed to pay the interest on past loans.
Interest payments of $495 million were made in FY 1998, necessitating advances of $370 million.
Total indebtedness stood at $5,856,556,899 as of September 30, 1998.
At the end of FY 1998, the Black Lung Benefits program provided monthly benefits to 58,320 Part C beneficiaries, while 12,861 Part C beneficiaries were receiving medical benefits only.
In addition, the program assumed administrative responsibility for Part B claims from the Social Security Administration as part of an effort to streamline and consolidate black lung claims handling within a single agency.
As of September 30, 1998, the program was performing maintenance actions for approximately 95,000 active Part B beneficiaries.
The Part B maintenance actions Strategic Plan goal reflects the program’s determination to provide quality service to both its Part B and Part C beneficiaries.
The OIG’s FY 1995 financial statement audit noted that several assumptions used by the Black Lung actuarial model had not been updated recently or reviewed to determine if changes were necessary.
ESA agreed to review and revise elements of the actuarial model.
Certain elements have been addressed; however, management should continue to refine and update the model for the following elements: age distribution, new entrant assumptions, and mortality table updates.
DOL will continue to improve the level and quality of employment and earnings outcomes for dislocated workers by using discretionary grant awards to improve quality service standards and outcomes in all program activities.
ETA, in particular, will integrate all available funding sources, including continued expansion of the joint enrollment in both dislocated worker and trade adjustment programs, to ensure early intervention assistance and timely submission and processing of requests for funding.
Programs addressing the outcome goal of “providing worker retraining” are the Job Training and Partnership Act (JTPA) Title III program, the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program, and the North American Free Trade Agreement-Transitional Adjustment Assistance (NAFTA-TAA) program The dislocated worker program seeks to maximize placement and wage replacement through community adjustment and retraining activities.
Funding for the dislocated worker program for Program year (PY) 1997 was $1.286 billion.
Eighty percent of the appropriation for the dislocated worker program under Title III of the JTPA is distributed to States through formula-funded block grants.
The remainder of the funds are awarded to States, on an as needed basis, to enable them to respond to specific dislocation events, which they could not address with their existing resources.
These funds are used to provide training and reemployment assistance to dislocated workers — those losing jobs through plant closings and mass layoffs — and to unemployed individuals with little prospect of returning to their previous occupations.
An estimated 614,000 dislocated workers were served in PY 1997 up from 548,830 in PY 1996.
Performance results for PY 1997 showed that 73% of program terminees were employed (entered employment rate) at an average wage replacement rate of 98%.
One quarter after program exit, 72% of program terminees were employed at an average replacement rate of 102%.
The performance goal for FY 1999 for the JTPA Title III dislocated worker program that will contribute to “providing worker retraining” is for 74% of program terminees to be employed at an average wage replacement rate of 93% at termination; and for 76% of program terminees to be employed one quarter after program exit at an average wage replacement rate of 97%.
These goals will be reconsidered given the FY 1997 results which exceeded expectations.
Trade Adjustment Assistance provides readjustment services and benefits for workers whose dislocations are related to imports.
These services and benefits include occupational and remedial training, job search assistance, relocation assistance, and income support for workers in approved training.
In FY 1998, $96.7 million was provided to States for TAA training, job search and relocation.
This funding was used to enroll an estimated 19,390 workers in classroom or on-the-job training and to provide job search assistance to an estimated 316 workers and relocation allowances to an estimated 524 workers.
An additional $30.0 million was provided for similar assistance under the North American Free Trade Agreement-Transitional Adjustment Assistance program, primarily to enroll an estimated 3,000 workers in classroom or on-the-job training.
Additionally, $174.7 million in Trade Readjustment Allowance benefits and $20.9 million in NAFTA-TAA Readjustment Allowance benefits were provided to States in FY 1998.
No performance outcome data on employment of program terminees are available for FY 1998 for the TAA or NAFTA-TAA programs.
The Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance has implemented a new performance measures and participant outcome data system which will measure and report on the outcomes achieved by TAA and NAFTA-TAA terminees and guide program improvement projects.
Data from this new system will be reported in FY 1999.
An OIG audit identified the need for the TAA program to adopt clearly stated and defined program goals, objectives, participant follow-up techniques, and related performance measures.
Data are needed to properly evaluate the program and meet GPRA reporting requirements.
ETA has published regulations providing guidance to the States in the approval of training programs for dislocated workers.
The regulations also provide criteria for waiving the training requirement to determine worker eligibility for supplemental income support.
ETA has also required its regional offices to review these practices in the states’ programs.
ETA will develop a system to collect data necessary for comparison of results against program goals and objectives.
The performance goal for FY 1999 for the TAA and NAFTA-TAA programs that will contribute to “providing worker retraining” is for 72% of program terminees of these programs to be employed.
The Secretary of Labor's key priorities for this strategic goal are to foster safe and healthy workplaces; influence international bodies addressing core labor standards and international child labor issues; increase the representation, advancement, and promotion of women, people of color, veterans, and the disabled in jobs; promote increased compliance with Family and Medical Leave Act requirements; and increase the number of workers with access to quality child care outside the family.
This goal is supported by: the Employment Standards Administration's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), and the Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB), the Women's Bureau (WB), the Employment and Training Administration's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, the Office of the Solicitor (SOL), and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM).
DOL will focus nation-wide attention on the most prevalent types of workplace injuries and illness, the most hazardous industries and the most hazardous workplaces, and address them through combined strategies of standards, enforcement and compliance and technical assistance activities.
DOL is also committed to reducing mine-related accidents, injuries and fatalities, and to placing greater emphasis on health issues.
The Department of Labor in partnership with the American mining community, works to eliminate fatalities, reduce the frequency and severity of accidents, and minimize health hazards associated with the mining industry in accordance with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977.
The Mine Act requires inspection of every underground mine four times each year and all surface mines two times each year to determine compliance with federal safety and health standards.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration's (MSHA) enforcement of mine safety and health standards addresses two strategic goals: Reduce injuries in the Nation's mines and Reduce miners' overexposure to health hazards— supported by performance objectives and enabling initiatives.
The first strategic goal, Reduce injuries in the Nation's mines, has these performance objectives: * Reduce the number of coal mine and metal and nonmetal mine fatalities to below the average number recorded for the previous 5 years.
Figure 12 Mining fatalities were at their lowest level during 1998, a direct result of MSHA safety-related efforts.
Mine fatalities decreased from 101 in FY 1997 to 80 in FY 1998 and is the lowest figure ever recorded.
It is well below the previous 5-year average of 95.8.
In coal mines, there were 38 FY 1997 fatalities compared with 28 in FY 1998, and in metal and nonmetal mines there were 63 fatalities in FY 1997 compared with 52 fatalities in FY 1998.
For nonfatal-days-lost injuries, the incidence rate of 3.76 in FY 1998 is well below the previous 5-year average of 4.29 (as well as being below the 3-year average for the end of third quarter rate of 4.26).
For coal mines the FY 1998 nonfatal-days-lost injury rate was 5.30 compared with 6.15 for the previous 5-year average, and for metal and nonmetal mines, the FY 1998 rate of 2.97 is below the previous 5-year average of 3.20.
In FY 1998, MSHA's safety-related efforts included its mandated inspection program, safety alerts, special focus "safety sweeps," education and training programs, and technical support programs.
The second strategic goal, *Reduce miners' overexposure to health hazards*, articulates the Department's increasing emphasis on the near and long-term medical health aspects and quality of life of the miner.
Specific areas of concern, respirable dust and noise, were the focus in developing the following performance objectives: * Reduce by 20% the percentage of samples out of compliance with the respirable coal mine dust standard.
Reduce by 20% the percentage of samples in metal and nonmetal mines that are out of compliance with the silica standard for the highest risk occupations.
Reduce by 20% the percentage of cases where the abatement time for silica over exposures exceeded 6 months in metal and nonmetal mines.
A strong focus on respiratory hazards in coal mines is maintained through the Respirable Coal Mine Dust Program.
Because operator dust samples may not be representative of the normal work environment to which miners are exposed, improvements to the existing sampling program are being sought.
MSHA has ensured that dust samples are taken four times a year at each underground mine and twice annually at each surface mine, targeted problem mines for additional attention, conducted seminars in the coal fields to discuss health issues, and entered into an agreement with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) to develop a personal dust monitor.
One technical advance to reduce miners' exposures to dust is through work on the machine-mounted continuous respirable dust monitors.
Four of the commercially built units have been installed on production equipment in underground coal mines to test their accuracy and reliability in providing real-time exposure data to miners, operators, and inspectors.
MSHA is continuing to press for the use of "single full-shift sampling" for checking dust concentrations in the working section of a mine.
MSHA has also continued to attack another debilitating illness of the respiratory system —silicosis—as a follow-on to the National Campaign to Eliminate Silicosis.
The Agency has implemented a revised sampling directive for the metal and nonmetal sector targeting high risk mines.
In order to get better data on the breadth and scope of the problem, a grace period was provided to mine operators for the reporting of occupational illnesses of any type.
Fines and Penalties System Compliance Issue: In an FY 1996 audit, the Office of the Inspector General recommended that steps be taken to ensure that MSHA's system used to track assessments and civil penalties be able to provide transaction level detail and automate computations for those billings, collections, writeoffs, accrued interest, administrative fees, and other adjustments in compliance with OMB Circular A-127.
MSHA developed reports to provide the necessary detail and automation of the processes.
The reports were implemented and await confirmation of compliance.
In Denver, the Homebuilders Association (HBA) and OSHA have established HomeSafe, which seeks to institute an effective safety and health program at 350 participating work sites.
Participants implement a Ten Point Program based on OSHA and industry analysis of key hazards known to cause fatal or serious accidents in the Denver homebuilding industry.
In the roofing industry, where improving safety and health is particularly difficult because of the short duration of many jobs, OSHA has established a partnership with the National Roofing Contractors' Association; the United Union of Roofers, Waterproofers and Allied Workers; CNA Insurance Company; and the National Safety Council.
The 20 contractors in the Chicago area who have achieved "Premier Status" under this program are eligible for OSHA incentives such as focused inspections and no penalties for non-serious violations, and possible incentives from CNA Insurance Company.
In recent OIG audits, the financial management system used by the OSHA to track proposed assessments and civil penalties levied against employers and/or operators for workplace safety violations was not in compliance with the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA).
The FY 1998 audit revealed that corrective actions have remedied the problems.
OSHA's Integrated Management Information System is now in compliance with the Act's standards.
Paul probably owes his life to a training program his company provided and funded by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
In February, 1998, Paul, 64 years old, was working for a manufacturing company in Morrison, Tenn.
The Tennessee OSHA (TOSHA) Consultation Program, part of a national network of safety and health services funded by OSHA, made a consultation visit to Paul's company.
Among other things, TOSHA provides safety and health training for employees and their employees.
During the visit to Paul's work site, the consultant observed that the plant was more than several minutes away from a medical provider -- time that could mean the difference between life and death.
Therefore, he urged the company to train its employees as on-site first aid responders, to administer first aid and CPR (cardiac pulmonary resuscitation), if necessary.
Paul's employer agreed and designated selected company employees to receive the recommended training, which includes instructions on how to recognize when someone is having a heart attack.
One day Pam, an employee who had been trained, noticed that Paul was sweating profusely and looked unusually pale.
She believed Paul was having a heart attack and took immediate action to contact emergency medical personnel.
Paul was rushed to a hospital, where he underwent angioplasty surgery.
A company official wrote TOSHA that Pam's "quick action in identifying the problem probably saved his life."
It is an example of the "important positive impact" of the OSHA-funded consultation program, the employer said.
Improvements to Occupational Injury and Illness Data: During FY 1998, progress has been made toward the goal of reducing injuries and illnesses at hazardous work sites by utilizing site-specific data.
This initiative will enable the agency to collect establishment and site-specific injury and illness data as well as information on injury and illness characteristics.
This will improve OSHA's ability to measure injury, illness and fatality rates, to target agency interventions on the most hazardous work sites, and to measure program outcomes established under GPRA.
The efforts are fully responsive to OIG audit recommendations and management reporting under the FMFIA.
The initiative includes the development of a quality control program to monitor employer injury and illness reporting, and is expected to be completed by January, 2000.
OSHA Grant Accounting Procedures Under Development: An FY 1997 OIG audit identified the need for accounting procedures to cover reconciliations and other monitoring activity.
OSHA is in the process of drafting the needed procedures.
Equal pay, sexual harassment, limited advancement opportunities and the ever persistent wage gap are issues that remain as vital today as they were twenty or thirty years ago.
DOL is committed to fostering workplaces that allow for equal opportunities for all working Americans including women, minorities, individuals with disabilities, and veterans.
The Department's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs 90FCCP) enforces compliance by Federal contractors under Executive Order 11245, as amended, section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended and 38 U.S.C. 4212 of the Vietnam Era Veterans' Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, as amended.
In addition, OFCCP has enforcement responsibilities under Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the equal opportunity requirements under the National Apprenticeship Act of 1937 and the Immigration and nationality Act, as amended.
DOL is the only agency in the government which ensures that employees of Federal contractors are protected by Federal contract-based civil rights laws.
OFCCP enforcement includes education, outreach, and when necessary, litigation.
A single Departmental goal assesses the Agency's performance in this area: Increase the number of contractors brought into compliance with the Equal Employment Opportunity provisions of federal contracts.
The goal beneficially impacts the lives and families of employees and applicants for employment.
Employees and applicants of Federal contractors that are in compliance with OFCCP - enforced laws can be assured that these contractors abide by fundamental principles of equality and fairness in the hiring, promotion, and retention process.
They can also be assured that these contractors practice fairness in pay and pay equity issues.
In FY 1998, the Department's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program (OFCCP) which administers the compliance programs, established, for GPRA purposes, baseline performance for this performance measure.
The baseline for increasing the number of contractors brought into compliance was established at 2,702.
Contractors brought into compliance" is a measurement of data taken from nationwide OFCCP sources of action.
These actions include the issuance and evaluation of Compliance Agreements, Letters of Commitment, settlement agreements, and other agreements.
Also included are complaint investigations which result in any of the actions listed above.
Increased demands placed on the workforce require that employers and employees alike successfully balance their work, family and community responsibilities.
DOL is committed to increased access to affordable, quality child care and the provision of information on initiatives that improve workers' ability to perform their job responsibilities without sacrificing their commitment to their parents and children.
The Department is in the process of refocusing its overall compliance enforcement efforts from the Job Training and Partnership Act to the recently enacted Workforce Investment Act.
During FY 1999, DOL will issue final regulations implementing the non-discrimination provisions of Section 188 of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA).
The Department's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) is promoting a national initiative that will improve the quality of the child care workforce, enhance a system for training and credentialing of child care providers throughout all States and Territories, and assist in the development of a voluntary set of nationally recognized skills standards for the Child Care Industry.
In FY 1997 and 1998, 19 States had child care apprenticeship programs.
The number of child care apprentices in FY 1998 was 1,914.
In September 1998, the Bureau sponsored a Satellite Child Care conference with satellite downlinks in 46 States with over 100 sites.
When Diana speaks about her work with children, she quiets the room with excitement, knowledge and commitment.
While it’s true Diana was always an active community volunteer, she, like many poor families, was unable to afford quality child care and transportation to enable her to seek employment outside the home.
Also, one of her four children suffers from severe asthma and needs vigilant parenting and medical care.
Thus, Diana relied on public assistance for more than ten years when she enrolled in the Satellite Child Care Program on April 6, 1998.
It was beyond Diana’s sincerest hopes and expectations that the program would provide the support she needed to secure suitable child care and the opportunity, upon graduation, to work at home providing quality child care services for other families in her community while continuing to be available to her own when needed.
Diana’s work preparation included classroom training in early childhood development, health, safety and nutrition, as well as hands-on work experience in a child care center.
Her appetite for learning was voracious.
She always completed assignments, participated in class discussions, and questioned, questioned, questioned.
Her enthusiasm has continued to grow, responding to positive feedback offered at every turn.
Diana has matured, becoming more self reflective, able to accept positive criticism and put it to good use.
Today, Diana is employed as a Satellite Child Care Provider, providing quality child care in her home under the supervision of a reputable child care agency in her neighborhood.
She earns an annual salary of $18,000 (almost $24,000 with overtime) and is now a union member with full health benefits and a pension.
Diana has learned to budget, is beginning to put aside money for emergencies, and is able to provide books, schools trips and toys for her children that she could never afford before.
Serving as a wonderful role model to her own children, Diana now provides a service essential to other families transitioning from public assistance to work.
The performance goal for FY 1999 for the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training that contributes to “supporting a greater balance between work and family” is to increase the number of States with child care apprenticeship programs to 29 and increase the number of child care apprentices by 10%, to at least 2,114, by replicating the West Virginia and other successful child care models.
In cooperation with the Center for Career Development in Early Care and Education (at Wheelock College in Boston), BAT will be moving forward with efforts designed to foster the partnerships needed for implementation of a West Virginia and best practice model on a nationwide basis.
The Women's Bureau places significant emphasis on the expansion of family-friendly programs to America's workers.
The Bureau is currently implementing the Department's Business-to-Business mentoring initiative on Child Care.
This national initiative is designed to improve the availability, accessibility, and affordability of safe, high quality child care to employees across the country.
The challenge facing the business community, particularly small and mid-sized businesses, is how to meet the demands of employees who are also parents – how to relieve them of the burden of being concerned about their children while they are at work.
The Women's Bureau is reaching out to businesses to promote awareness among industry leaders that affordable and safe child care is a top concern for families.
One method being used is to connect employers who have effective child care programs with other employers considering child care options for their workers.
The performance goal for FY 1999 for the Women's Bureau that contributes to "supporting a greater balance between work and family" is to increase the number of new January of last year, Alicia made a New Year's resolution to end her reliance on public assistance.
A year passed, and having graduated from the Consortium for Worker Education's Satellite Child Care Program, she is fully employed as a Satellite Child Care Provider in Central Harlem, New York City.
But at the age of 24, Alicia could no longer depend on the support of her family and had to stop working in order to receive the cash, food, and rent subsidies she needed to support herself and her newborn son.
For two years, Alicia struggled with the welfare system and the lack of respect she felt it accorded her.
Independence, for Alicia, involved not only moving away from home, but freedom from dependence on the welfare system.
Today, Alicia's apartment is set up to emulate an early childhood classroom.
The training and hands-on work experience she received as a participant in the Satellite Child Care Program has prepared her to provide developmentally appropriate care for up to 5 children in her home.
With the start-up kit she received on providing quality child care for children in her community, Alicia dreams of attending college at night and, one day, running her own day care center.
Young and ambitious, she sees her employment as a Satellite Child Care Provider as a building block in her professional career and the key to her personal freedom.
The 840 employer baseline was established in FY 1997 based on results from the Bureau's Working Women County Honor Roll Program.
The new program is voluntary and relies on information provided by the employers.
Impact will be measured through a follow-up OMB approved form specifically geared to employers who in turn can provide information on the number of employees impacted.
DOL provides funding support for programs and initiatives related to international labor standards issues with a particular focus on funding international child labor-related program activities.
Additional funding support, appropriated by Congress, is contributed to the International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor.
The International Labor Affairs Bureau (ILAB) includes a number of Departmental activities and programs which focus on carrying out the Secretary of Labor's international responsibilities.
These include Departmental policy and programs relating to international labor activities, and coordinating Departmental international activities involving other U.S. Government agencies, intergovernmental organizations, and nongovernmental organizations.
In support of the Secretary of Labor's goals, DOL's international labor programs focus on implementing core labor standards, by working to eliminate international child labor, particularly through the International Labor Organization's International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC); implementation of the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation (NAALC), the labor supplemental agreement to NAFTA; assist in developing the approach to labor issues under the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA); working in international fora to develop strategies to strengthen the implementation of such standards, and operating technical assistance programs that help countries in transition develop stable labor systems that enable the implementation of labor standards in these newly emerging democracies.
ILAB's performance measures for the most part are nonstatistical.
ILAB's goals generally consist of the development, operation, and completion of programs or the representation of policies.
Technical assistance programs consist of those funded by USAID and the World Bank, both of which perform independent evaluations of the programs.
Other programs such as those in the child labor area, NAFTA, or similar type programs can be measured by assessing the completion of intended activities by given dates.
ILAB has committed to developing more quantifiable performance measures.
GPRA has provided a valuable set of tools to enhance the Department’s programs.
A major challenge in FY 1998 was to set a management framework to use those tools and to establish a process aimed to assure the Department’s performance and level of accountability for program results.
A Management Council, chaired by the Deputy Secretary with members comprising Agency Assistant Secretaries, has been established to provide a forum for discussing substantive management issues, including those with resource implications.
The Council is involved in assessing and reviewing the progress of Agency programs, Information Technology strategic planning, the budget process, and the legislative agenda.
A Strategic and Performance Plan Workgroup was also established as a permanent cross-agency team that prepares the Department’s Annual Performance and Strategic Plans.
The team develops and updates both plans and responds to opportunities for cross-cutting initiatives among agencies both internal and external to the Department.
A DOL-wide process to report and monitor Agency performance against performance goals in the DOL Annual Performance Plan has been proposed to meet the Secretary’s and Deputy Secretary’s management needs.
Performance information on the programs of the Department has been aligned with the Department’s Strategic goals in this Accountability Report and is consistent with the performance reporting requirements under the Government Performance and Results Act.
FY 1998 is the base year for establishing data to be used to measure progress over the period covered by the Department’s Strategic Plan.
Some measures that were first developed in the Department’s FY 1999 Performance Plan do not have accompanying FY 1998 performance data.
Where data is unavailable, progress toward establishing the measure and obtaining the data is provided.
When this report is prepared for FY 1999, program data will be reported for all measures in the Department’s and Agency performance plans.
This section presents DOL Agency activity for FY 1998 against the FY 1999 performance goals and indicators in the FY 1999 Departmental Annual Performance Plan prepared as a requirement of the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA).
Maintaining a Departmental Strategic Management Focus DOL FY 1998 Accountability Report performance goals.
FY 1999 Performance Goal -- The specific targets relative to the outcome goal which will be accomplished in FY 1999. Program changes have resulted in some goals included in the FY 1999 being deleted and other goals being added. The notation *add* or *drop* under the number of a goal indicates a deleted or added goal. For most changes an explanation is provided as a footnote to the goal. * FY 1998 Activity -- Where the organization has performance data to report for FY 1998 against the performance goal it is reported here.
Other information related to the status of goal in terms of progress in establishing baseline data may also be included.
The Department has established long term management initiatives and performance goals to address departmental functions such as financial management, information technology, and human resources management.
DOL will improve mission performance, productivity, communication linkages, and administrative processes through greater utilization of information technology.
The goal is to reduce risks and contain costs through greater internal coordination and integration, while providing DOL employees with quality automated tools and timely information so they can better perform their jobs.
The following summary addresses key aspects of DOL Y2K progress.
Additional information can be obtained from the Quarterly Report on the Status of the Department of Labor's Year 2000 Efforts.
The report is prepared by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management's Information Technology Center.
As of March 31, 1999, all 61 of the Department of Labor's most important computer systems have been repaired or replaced and are compliant and ready for operation in the year 2000.
In the coming months, further steps will be taken to assure the readiness of our mission critical systems, to finalize and test our contingency plans, and to complete independent verification and validation activities.
These measures will further ensure that DOL core services can be delivered without interruption in the year 2000.
The validation process is an important step in preparing DOL mission critical systems to be successfully implemented.
Accordingly, project management has emphasized quality and not rushed the completion of validation, which is very nearly complete for all mission critical systems.
IV&V) has been performed for over half of the Department's mission critical systems, and all assessed systems are rated at "low risk" for experiencing a Y2K related failure.
IV&V evaluations are scheduled to meet the Department's June 30, 1999 IV&V completion milestone.
DOL data exchanges are 80 percent compliant.
Compliance is being closely monitored as an integral part of assuring that Departmental systems will function, and that State and private partners meet agreed upon interface responsibilities.
The Department is improving its strategy for ensuring the readiness of its systems by verifying that system contingency plans address all data exchanges.
Infrastructure compliance has been emphasized as implementation of mission critical systems has occurred.
Assessments are completed for buildings, telecommunications, and information technology systems, including embedded chip devices, and remediation is proceeding as scheduled.
The Department strengthened its Year 2000 Team with the recent addition of staff to concentrate on non-IT infrastructure readiness.
Business Continuity and Contingency Plans (BCCPs) have been prepared, which identify the Department's seven core business functions.
Beginning in January, DOL initiated a rigorous review and refinement process for its BCCPs to ensure that these plans are viable and complete.
DOL non-mission critical systems conversion is progressing, with 62 of 79 (78 percent) of these systems now Y2k compliant.
Overall progress is also indicated by the 53 State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs), which successfully met the unemployment insurance (UI) system's first major Y2k challenge.
Continuity of Business Plans The Department's approach to Business Continuity and Contingency Plan (BCCP) preparation is guided by the GAO's Year 2000 Computing Crisis: Business Continuity and Contingency Planning, the work and experiences of other agencies, such as the Social Security Administration, and the core business functions and structure of the Department.
The business continuity planning process began in February 1998, when the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management/CIO requested plans from agencies by July 1998 for all mission critical benefit systems, financial systems and any system that did not anticipate meeting the major OMB milestones.
In April 1998, the requirement for BCCPs was expanded to include all core business functions to reduce the risk of Year 2000-induced business failures.
The development of BCCPs is an iterative process.
These plans, delivered in July 1998, were revised in September and are scheduled for further review, update, and testing in 1999.
DOL has seven high-level core business functions: * Labor and employment policy and oversight.
Worker safety and health policy oversight.
Workers' benefits.
Job training programs and employment assistance.
Benefits programs.
Tracking national employment and/or economic conditions.
The review of BCCPs began in January with an executive staff briefing and workshop for core business process managers.
This review will focus on verifying core business processes, risks and alternative actions, and increasing where necessary, the level of detail presented in the contingency planning section of the BCCPs.
Current plans, call for finalizing BCCPs by May 1999 and completing testing by September 1999.
During FY 1998, DOL-wide data relationship and coding structure comparisons completed.
DOL employee data has been moved to the new system data base.
ITC, in conjunction with OASP, has been working toward an effective institutionalized solution for improved public access to DOL information.
During FY 1998, sophisticated Search Engine software (Verity) has been acquired and implemented to enhance search and retrieval functions across all DOL Internet servers.
A project is underway to enhance DOL's implementation of the Government Information Locator System (GILS) improving indexing of available DOL information.
Software has been acquired and implemented to facilitate public access to DOL regulations, guidelines and assistance materials allowing public commenting via the Internet.
OASP and ITC will continue to expand these capabilities to provide easier and more robust features for public access to DOL information and interaction with DOL programs.
Civil Monetary Penalties System (CMP); Federal Employees' Compensation Act System (FECA), and Longshore Special Fund System (LSFS).
The auditors also reviewed prior year recommendations pertaining to other DOL systems.
The audit noted several weaknesses that affect one or more of these systems.
Independent risk assessments have not been performed or properly documented on a regular basis or at the time systems, facilities, or other conditions change (BCDS, CMP, and FECA).
An independent group responsible for security administration has not been established (BCDS, CMP, DOLARS, FECA, and LSFS).
The FECA system has not been accredited by the program manager.
FECA's host data center has no security plan, and the security plan for DOLARS is incomplete.
Existing computer security termination procedures are inadequate (BLDTF and FECA).
There were several instances where security clearances had not been performed for personnel considered critical users (DOLARS).
The following disaster recovery/business continuity issues were identified: - Lack of disaster recovery/business continuity plans (BCDS, CMP and FECA).
Lack of complete inventory listings of items such as computer hardware, software, and telecommunications needed for operations (DOLARS and FECA).
Lack of documented policies and procedures for performing system backup and tape storage (LSFS).
Standard system access request forms and authorization procedures are not used.
Users share IDs and passwords (BCDS, CMP, and DOLARS).
Servers reside in an unsecured location, with a minimally controlled environment (LSFS).
Lack of review of access logs of sensitive data files (BCDS and CMP).
Lack of up-to-date change control policies and procedures (BCDS, CMP, DOLARS, and FECA).
Lack of a library management system (DOLARS and FECA).
In addition, FECA program development staff have access to both test and production environments.
Inadequate documentation of FECA technical programming and user operations, and Job Corps software development and configuration management.
The Office of the Chief Information Officer, the Office of the Chief Financial Officer, and the major agencies are addressing each of these findings in a departmentwide effort to update major system security plans.
The Department's Management Control Policy Board is also monitoring Department's Y2k and computer security efforts.
One of DOL’s key aims in the area of Human Resources Management is to provide its staff with the knowledge and skills necessary to effectively accomplish the Department’s strategic goals.
This objective will be achieved through the retooling of DOL’s workforce through a series of lifelong learning initiatives.
As part of this effort, DOL will be a model workplace and facilitate the recruitment and retention of a diverse, highly-skilled workforce capable of meeting DOL’s strategic and performance goals, while creating an “employee-friendly” environment that allows employees to better balance their work and family obligations.
Increase by 10% the number of employees utilizing continuous learning/development and career management programs and services.
Baseline data for the measure has been established for FY 1998.
Increase participation in “employee-friendly” programs by 10%.
Baseline data for the measure has been established for FY 1998.
Complete a review of one of the ten major DOL agencies that verify that all DOL agencies have procedures in place to meet the requirements of applicable civil rights laws.
The OIG noted in its FY 1992 audit the need for developing a strategy for allocating DOL Academy costs based on usage of the Academy’s training services ensuring cost recoveries which are based on unit pricing of goods and services reflecting the current costs to the WCF for providing such service.
WCF has now developed such a strategy.
During FY 1999, the OCFO will monitor reporting of recovery data from the Human Resources Center to ensure that the strategy is properly implemented.
The Department’s Strategic and Performance Plans include goals to maintain the Department’s clean audit opinion and to bring all financial systems into conformance with the governmentwide standards in the Federal Financial Management Integrity Act (FFMIA).
The Department has again received an unqualified audit opinion on its FY 1998 Consolidated Financial Statements.
This accomplishment represents more than maintaining the status quo, since financial management staff throughout the Department met rigorous new managerial cost and other accounting standards that went into effect in FY 1998.
In FY 1998, DOL agencies made 175,951 payments that were subject to the Prompt Payment Act, with a total dollar value of $500 million.
Interest penalties due to late payments were $136,320, down $3,200 from FY 1997, and the percent of late payments which incurred a penalty was also down slightly.
The overall on-time payment percent was off from FY 1997 by .4%, due primarily to difficulties in one area.
This problem has been resolved.
The dollar volume of penalties continues to represent (at less than three-tenths of one percent) a statistically insignificant portion of payments made.
Monetary Penalties are assessed by four DOL program agencies: OSHA; MSHA; PWBA; and ESA.
Together, these agencies assess approximately $100 million in penalties, one of the highest among Federal Agencies.
The chart below shows recent collection activity.
Last year, the OIG audit identified seven of 16 financial systems that did not fully comply with the FFMIA.
The Department brought two of those systems into compliance with the Act.
Four of the systems are expected to be brought into compliance with the Act in 1999 and the remaining system has targeted corrective actions in FY 2000.
The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) recently implemented a new financial reporting system and fully adopted the new Federal financial statement format required by OMB Bulletin 97-01, as amended.
The OCFO still needs to complete documentation that provides an integrated view of the procedures, personnel and systems employed in preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
The Department allocated agencies' costs to the respective responsibility segments included in the financial statements.
However, the rationale for agency cost allocation methodologies was not adequately documented.
The strategies used by some DOL agencies to determine internal control and financial management system weaknesses, as required by the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA), were limited to reviewing the OIG's internal control findings presented as part of the annual financial statement audit.
As provided in OMB guidance for FMFIA, agencies should consider other sources and self-assessments.
The departmentwide Management Control Policy Board is addressing this issue The Department continues to have problems reconciling its accounts with Treasury.
Unreconciled differences at September 30 increased 36 percent over FY 1997.
Further, while Treasury has discontinued the use of Budget Clearing Accounts as of the end of FY 1998, the Department still had unreconciled differences in these accounts.
Because of these differences with Treasury, the Department cannot ensure that all deposits and disbursements are accurately recorded.
During the audit it was found that several FECA payments had been diverted to an employee's personal bank account.
This situation could have been detected if proper reconciliations with Treasury were conducted As originally noted in an FY 1996 audit, agencies need guidance on the proper identification, accounting, collection, and reporting for accounts receivable.
The Acting Chief Financial Officer intends to update departmental policy by providing minimum requirements that all agencies should follow in accounting for accounts receivable balances at year end.
The Department continues to play a leadership role within the Federal Government in implementing the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 (DCIA), particularly with regard to cross-servicing delinquent debts with the Treasury Department.
Although ranking in the bottom third of agencies in terms of dollar volume of debt available to be cross-serviced, DOL has referred over $30 million of delinquent debt to Treasury, ranking fifth among federal agencies.
DOL program agencies, particularly OSHA, have also worked closely with Treasury staff to assist them in developing debt management systems that meet the needs of other Federal Agencies.
Although significant progress has been made, with over 70% of all eligible debt having been referred to Treasury, DOL is not fully in compliance with DCIA.
Eight DOL program agencies have not referred all receivables that have been delinquent for a period of 180 days to the Department of the Treasury for collection.
Written plans have been requested from each agency detailing their timetables for gaining substantial compliance with the Act, as well as procedures for staying in compliance once all of the older debt has been referred.
The Department continues to increase the number of EFT payments made, although at a modest rate.
DOL continues to lag government averages due to the ESA medical and benefit program payments, which account for 83% of the volume of all payments processed in the Department.
EFT capability is expected to be available for FECA payments to medical providers in the year 2000.
FECA payments represent 34% of all payments processed, and are the largest portion of ESA payments as well.
Significant improvement was achieved in Travel and Miscellaneous payments, where the percentage of payments made via EFT rose from 23% to 83%.
The Government Management Reform Act authorized the Office of Management and Budget to consolidate into one report a number of statutory reporting requirements.
The Department is submitting its second annual Accountability Report under OMB guidelines.
The following Acts require the Department to report various matters that come to the attention of audit and DOL management officials.
This information is provided above in related program and management sections of this report.
The Chief Financial Officers’ Act prescribed the compilation and audit of annual financial statements.
In addition to expressing an opinion in the audit on the fair presentation of the principal financial statements, the Department’s OIG has other reporting responsibilities under Standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and OMB bulletin 98-08, Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements, including the identification of: *Reportable Conditions:* Significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal controls that could adversely affect the Department’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data.
Material Weaknesses:* Reportable conditions that could result in misstatements in amounts that would significantly affect the financial statements.
The FY 1998 DOL audit revealed no material weaknesses.
Compliance Issues:* Instances of noncompliance with laws and regulations pertaining to the Department including the financial systems and accounting standards in FFMIA.
The Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 requires the Secretary to report to the President and the Congress: *Material weaknesses* under Section 2 of the Act.
Federal agency heads are required to report management control weaknesses that significantly impair the fulfillment of an agency or component’s mission, deprives the public of needed services, or significantly weakens safeguards against waste, loss, unauthorized use or misappropriation of funds, property, or other assets.
System nonconformances* under Section 4 of the Act.
This reporting requirement has been superseded by requirements to report all instances in which financial systems are not in compliance with the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act.
Government Performance and Results Act of 1994 requires the Department to develop goals and related program measures in its six-year Strategic Plan and its Annual Performance Plan.
The Act further requires an annual report covering the Department’s performance in meeting those goals.
The first performance report required under the Act is in March 1999.
The Inspector General Act Amendments of 1988 require the Department to report on management’s efforts to close audits conducted by the OIG.
The Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) requires agencies to report annually to Congress on their financial status and any other information needed to fairly present the agencies' financial position and results of operations.
To meet the CFO Act reporting requirements, the United States Department of Labor (DOL), a Department of the United States Government, prepares annual financial statements, which we audit.
The objective of our audit is to express an opinion on the fair presentation of DOL's Fiscal Year 1998 principal financial statements.
Our objective also is to obtain an understanding of the Department's internal control and test compliance with laws and regulations that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
We have audited the consolidated balance sheet of the United States Department of Labor as of September 30, 1998, and the consolidated statements of net costs, changes in net position, budgetary resources, financing, and custodial activity for the year then ended.
These financial statements are the responsibility of the DOL's management.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards; the standards applicable to financial statements contained in Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin 98-08, Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements, as amended.
These standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatements.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.
An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
As required by OMB Bulletin 97-01, Form and Content of Agency Financial Statements, as amended, Note 1 to the financial statements describes the basis of accounting used by the Department to prepare the financial statements, which is a comprehensive basis of accounting other than generally accepted accounting principles.
The financial statements for the year ended September 30, 1998 include: ● costs for grants, subsidies, and contributions primarily with various state and local understanding of the design of relevant internal controls, determined whether they had been placed in operation, assessed control risk, and performed tests of the significant internal controls in order to determine our auditing procedures for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial statements and not to provide assurance on the internal control over financial reporting.
Consequently, we do not express an opinion on such controls.
In addition, we considered the DOL's internal control over Required Supplementary Stewardship Information by obtaining an understanding of the agency's internal controls, determining whether they had been placed in operation, assessed control risk, and performed tests of controls as required by OMB Bulletin 98-08, as amended, and not to provide assurance on these internal controls.
Accordingly, we do not provide assurance on such controls.
Our consideration of the internal control over financial reporting would not necessarily disclose all matters in the internal control over financial reporting that might be reportable conditions.
Under standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, reportable conditions are matters coming to our attention relating to significant deficiencies in the design or operation of the internal control that, in our judgment, could adversely affect the agency's ability to record, process, summarize, and report financial data consistent with the assertions by management in the financial statements.
Material weaknesses are reportable conditions in which the design or operation of one or more of the internal control components does not reduce to a relatively low level the risk that misstatements in amounts that would be material in relation to the financial statements being audited may occur and not be detected within a timely period by employees in the normal course of performing their assigned functions.
We noted certain matters, listed below, involving the internal control and its operations that we consider to be reportable conditions.
However, none of the reportable conditions is believed to be a material weakness.
We noted other matters involving the internal control and its operations that will be reported to the management of DOL in a separate letter.
The management of the DOL is responsible for complying with laws and regulations applicable to the Department.
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the Department's financial statements are free of material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws and regulations, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts and certain other laws and regulations specified in OMB Bulletin 98-08, as amended, including the requirements referred to in the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA).
The results of our tests of compliance with the laws and regulations described in the preceding paragraph, exclusive of FFMIA, disclosed instances of noncompliance with certain laws and regulations that are required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards and OMB Bulletin 98-08, as amended: Providing an opinion on compliance with certain provisions of laws and regulations was not an objective of our audit and, accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.
States Government Standard General Ledger (SGL) at the transaction level.
To meet this requirement, we performed tests of compliance using the implementation guidance for FFMIA included in Appendix D of OMB Bulletin 98-08, as amended.
Our FY 1997 audit disclosed that seven subsidiary DOL financial management systems did not substantially comply with one or more of the three requirements discussed in the preceding paragraph.
The results of the current year audit disclosed that five of the seven systems remain in noncompliance: This report is intended solely for the information of the U. S. Department of Labor management, the Office of Management and Budget, and the Congress.
This report is not intended to be and should not be used by anyone other than these specified parties.
However, this report is a matter of public record and its distribution is not limited.
Reportable Conditions: The following chart provides reportable conditions by area of concern, the year first identified, and page references for a general discussion of individual audit areas in this Accountability Report.
More detailed discussion of the findings in each of these audit areas is available in the Department’s FY 1998 Consolidated Financial Statement Audit.
The Audit can be found on the Internet at http://www.dol.gov/dol/ocfo/public/publications/main.htm.
The Secretary's letter certifies that the Department's internal controls, taken as a whole, comply with the FMFIA.
Six management control exceptions are noted.
These six management control weaknesses, reported in prior years under Section 2 of the Act, remain open.
The charts on pages 84 and 85 identify activity under the FMFIA program since its inception, and references to open FMFIA material weaknesses discussed in this Accountability Report.
During FY 1998, the Department corrected one material non-conformance reported under Section 4 of the FMFIA.
No major financial systems non- conformances were reported in FY 1998 under the FMFIA; however, five financial system weaknesses with lower materiality are being reported under the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act.
The Inspector General Act Amendments of 1988 require explanations for all audit reports with recommendations open for more than one year.
DOL management and audit communities agree that some of these audit resolutions will require several years to complete the corrective action.
As of 9/30/98, 132 audit reports have been open for over one year.
The total value of open audits of $33.1 million covers 505 separate recommendations.
Table 8 demonstrates that most of the reportable audits and recommendations that further action.
DOL agencies and the OIG jointly manage and update an audit tracking system where the current status of each open audit is maintained.
Final closure of the audit is determined only by final decisions of the reviewing officials.
Many of these decisions take years before being rendered and the audit closed.
Of the 100 open audit reports requiring further discussion, 28 were monetary audits totaling $10.8 million.
Of the 49 monetary audits, distributed by value as follows: are over one year old are not under the direct control of and cannot be closed by the Department.
Auditees have certain rights to appeal audit decisions made by the Office of the Inspector General, including appeals to an Administrative Law Judge or a Federal Circuit Court of Appeals.
Audits are not considered closed simply because the claim is being appealed and sent forward for The most significant of the non-monetary open audit findings are discussed in this report.
A listing of all open audits is available upon request from the Department's Office of the Chief Financial Officer.
The principal financial statements included in this report have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (P.L. 101-576), the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 and the Office of Management and Budget's (OMB) Bulletin 97-01, "Form and Content of Agency Financial Statements."
The responsibility for the integrity of the financial information included in these statements rests with management of the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL).
The audit of DOL's principal financial statements was performed by the Office of Inspector General (OIG).
The auditors' report issued by the Assistant Inspector General accompanies the principal statements.
The Department's principal financial statements for fiscal year (FY) 1998 consisted of the following: The principal financial statements report the financial position and results of operations of DOL pursuant to the requirements of U.S.C. 3515(b).
The statements have been prepared from the books and records of DOL in accordance with OMB prescribed formats.
The statements are different from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources, which are prepared from the same books and records.
The statements should be read with the realization that they are for a component of the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity, and that liabilities reported in the financial statements cannot be liquidated without legislation that provides resources to do so.
These consolidated financial statements present the financial position, net cost of operations, changes in net position, budgetary resources, financing and custodial activities of the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL), a cabinet level agency of the Executive Branch of the United States Government.
DOL, through the execution of its congressionally approved budget, operates programs under three of the major budget functions established by Congress in the Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974: (1) education, training, employment and social services; (2) health (occupational health and safety); and (3) income security.
DOL's budget consists of annual, multi-year and no-year appropriations covering various program activities within these budget functions.
DOL's financial activity is recorded by appropriation in individual funds, categorized within three separate fund types.
These fund types and the individual funds comprising each are discussed below: This fund type is used to account for the financing of goods or services provided by a central operation to agencies and other functions within DOL.
Operations are funded on a cost reimbursement basis by the recipients of the goods or services.
DOL accounts for one revolving fund.
The Working Capital Fund is responsible for the maintenance and operation of a comprehensive program of centralized services in the national office and the field.
The Fund is reimbursed in advance from funds available to agencies, bureaus and offices for which centralized services are performed at rates which will return in full the cost of operations.
This fund type is used to account for receipts that are held in trust and dedicated to specific purposes or for use in carrying out specific programs.
The assets of trust funds may be held over a period of time and may be used to purchase revenue producing investments.
DOL accounts for the following trust funds: The Unemployment Trust Fund was established under Title IX of the Social Security Act to receive, hold, invest and disburse monies collected under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act, as well as state unemployment taxes collected by state employment security agencies and transferred to the Fund, and the unemployment taxes collected by the Railroad Retirement Board and transferred to the Fund.
The Longshore and Harbor Workers' Trust Fund provides medical benefits, compensation for lost wages and rehabilitation services for job related injuries and diseases or death to private sector workers in certain maritime and related employment.
The District of Columbia Trust Fund provides compensation and medical care payments to District of Columbia employees for work related injuries or death which occurred prior to July 26, 1982.
The Black Lung Disability Trust Fund provides compensation and medical benefits to eligible coal miners who suffer disability due to pneumoconiosis, and compensation benefits to their dependent survivors.
The Hazardous Substance Response Fund provides for clean up of hazardous substance emergencies and abandoned hazardous waste sites.
Gifts and Bequests uses miscellaneous funds received by gift or bequest in support of various activities of the Secretary of Labor.
This fund type is used to account for receipts not dedicated to specific purposes and expenses arising under congressional appropriations or other authorizations to spend general revenues.
DOL accounts for the following appropriated funds: Salaries and Expenses include appropriated funds which are used for departmental administration and other activities in carrying out the missions and functions of the Department, except where specifically provided for from other funds of the Department.
Training and Employment Services provides for a flexible, decentralized system of Federal and local programs of training and other services for the economically disadvantaged designed to lead to permanent gains in employment, through grants to states and Federal programs such as Job Corps, currently authorized by the Job Training Partnership Act.
State Unemployment Insurance and Employment Service Operations includes grants to states for administering the Unemployment Compensation and Employment Service programs.
Unemployment Compensation provides administrative grants to state agencies which pay unemployment benefits to eligible workers and collect state unemployment taxes from employers.
The Employment Service is a nationwide system providing no-fee employment services to individuals who are seeking employment and employers who are seeking workers.
Employment Service activities within the states are financed by allotments to states distributed under a demographically based funding formula established under the Wagner-Peyser Act, as amended.
The Federal Employees Workers' Compensation Fund provides wage replacement benefits and payment for medical services to covered Federal civilian employees injured on the job, employees who have incurred a work related occupational disease and beneficiaries of employees whose death is attributable to a job related injury.
The Fund also provides for rehabilitation of injured employees to facilitate their return to work.
Payments to the Unemployment Trust Fund was initiated as a result of amendments to the Emergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC) law, which provided general fund financing to the UTF to pay emergency unemployment benefits and associated administrative costs.
The Fund continues to process benefit overpayment refunds for the terminated EUC program.
Advances to the Unemployment Trust Fund and Other Funds provides advances to other accounts within the Unemployment Trust Fund to pay unemployment compensation whenever the balances in these accounts prove insufficient or whenever reimbursements to certain accounts, as allowed by law, are to be made.
This account also provides repayable advances to the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, to make disability payments whenever the fund balance proves insufficient.
Federal Unemployment Benefits and Allowances provides for payment of benefits, training, job search and relocation allowances as authorized by the Trade Act of 1974.
Community Service Employment for Older Americans provides part time work experience in community service activities to unemployed, low income persons aged 55 and over.
The Panama Canal Commission Compensation Fund has been established to provide for the accumulation of funds to meet the Panama Canal Commission's obligations for workers' compensation which will accrue under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
DOL and the Department of the Treasury (Treasury) are jointly responsible for the operations of two of the largest funds within the reporting entity, the Unemployment Trust Fund and the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
DOL's Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and Employment Standards Administration (ESA), respectively, are responsible for the administrative oversight and policy direction for the programs financed by these trust funds.
Treasury acts as custodian over monies deposited into the funds and also invests amounts in excess of disbursing requirements in Treasury securities on behalf of DOL.
Through agreement with Treasury, DOL consolidates the financial results of the Unemployment Trust Fund and the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund for the preparation of financial statements prescribed under Section 303(b) of the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act of 1990.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of all funds under DOL control.
All interfund balances and transactions have been eliminated.
The consolidated financial statements do not include the effect of centrally administered assets and liabilities related to the Federal government as a whole, which may in part be attributable to DOL.
The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), a wholly owned Federal government corporation under the chairmanship of the Secretary of Labor, has been designated by OMB as a separate reporting entity for financial statement purposes and has been excluded from the DOL reporting entity.
The consolidated financial statements present the financial position and results of operations of DOL, as required by the CFO Act of 1990, and the Government Management Reform Act of 1994, as well as the net cost of operations, changes in net position, budgetary resources, financing and custodial activity of DOL, as required by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in OMB Bulletin 97-01.
They have been prepared from the books and records of DOL, in accordance with the form and content for entity financial statements specified in OMB Bulletin 97-01 and DOL's accounting policies, as summarized in Note 1.
These statements are, therefore, different from the financial reports, also prepared by DOL pursuant to OMB directives, that are used to monitor and control DOL's use of budgetary resources.
OMB Bulletin 97-01 requires the following balance sheet classification of assets and liabilities: * Assets should be classified and aggregated as entity and non-entity, based upon whether or not DOL has the authority to use the assets in its operations.
An amount equal to non-entity assets should be recognized as a liability due to other entities.
Liabilities should be classified and aggregated as covered by budgetary resources and not covered by budgetary resources, based upon whether or not budget authority or other resources have been made available to cover the liabilities.
Liabilities covered by budgetary resources represent obligations of the government against available appropriations or other funds.
Certain assets and liabilities should also be classified as intragovernmental.
Intragovernmental assets and liabilities arise from transactions among entities within the Federal government.
Under the authority of the CFO Act of 1990, the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) was established to recommend Federal accounting standards to the Secretary of the Treasury, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Comptroller General, co-principals of the FASAB.
Specific standards agreed upon by the three principals are concurrently issued by the Director of OMB and the Comptroller General.
Federal and state unemployment taxes represent non-exchange revenues collected from employers based on wages paid to employees in covered employment.
Federal unemployment taxes are collected by the Internal Revenue Service and transferred to designated Federal accounts within the Unemployment Trust Fund.
State unemployment taxes are collected by each State and deposited in separate State accounts within the Unemployment Trust Fund.
Federal unemployment taxes are used to pay the Federal share of extended unemployment benefits and to provide for Federal and State administrative expenses related to the operation of the unemployment insurance program.
State unemployment taxes are restricted in their use to the payment of unemployment benefits.
Excise taxes are collected from coal mine operators based on the sale of coal.
These excise taxes are collected by the Internal Revenue Service and transferred to the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
Employer tax revenues are recognized on a modified cash basis, to the extent of cash transferred by the collecting entity to the receiving entity, plus the change in inter-entity balances between the collecting and receiving entity.
Inter-entity balances represent revenue received by the collecting entity but not yet transferred to the receiving entity, as well as adjustments made by the collecting entity to previous transfers and amounts due to the collecting entity, net of allowance.
State unemployment tax revenues were $20.0 billion, Federal unemployment tax revenues were $6.4 billion and excise tax revenues were $635.8 million in 1998.
Non-exchange revenue is imputed by DOL to provide for pension and other retirement benefit expenses recognized by DOL but financed by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), the Federal agency administering DOL's pension plans.
See Note 12).
The Unemployment Trust Fund, Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act Trust Fund (Longshore and Harbor Workers' Trust Fund), District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Trust Fund (District of Columbia Trust Fund) and Panama Canal Commission Compensation Fund receive interest on fund investments.
Interest is recognized as non-exchange revenue when earned.
Interest is also earned on Federal funds in the possession of non-Federal entities.
The Longshore and Harbor Workers' Trust Fund and District of Columbia Trust Fund receive non-exchange revenues from assessments levied on insurance companies and self-insured employers.
Assessments are recognized as non-exchange revenues when due.
Also recognized as other non-exchange revenue are reimbursements due to the Unemployment Trust Fund from state and local government entities and non-profit organizations for the cost of unemployment benefits provided to or accrued on behalf of their employees.
See Note 13).
Job Corps center construction costs are capitalized as construction-in-progress until completed and are then classified as improvements to facilities.
Leasehold improvements made at Job Corps centers and DOL facilities leased from the General Services Administration are recorded at cost and amortized over their useful lives, using the straight-line amortization method.
DOL has no leases longer than one year.
Plant and equipment are depreciated over their useful lives using the straight-line method of depreciation.
The following table shows the depreciation periods used for the major classes of DOL plant and equipment: Programs administering DOL funds have acquired real and tangible property in which DOL has a reversionary interest.
When this property is disposed of or no longer used for its authorized purpose, DOL is entitled to a pro rata share of the proceeds from sale or the property's fair market value, if the property is retained but no longer used for DOL purposes.
The value of property in which DOL has a reversionary interest is not determinable.
6.) Funds are provided by Congressional appropriation, as advances to DOL's Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, as may be necessary to meet the obligations of the fund.
Financing for these advances is provided through transfers from the Advances to the Unemployment Trust Fund and Other Funds appropriation.
These advances are repayable with interest at a rate determined by the Secretary of the Treasury to be equal to the current average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods to maturity comparable to the anticipated period during which the advance will be outstanding.
Advances made prior to 1982 carried rates of interest equal to the average rate borne by all marketable interest-bearing obligations of the United States then forming a part of the public debt.
Outstanding advances at September 30, 1998 bear interest rates ranging from 5.625% to 13.875%.
Amounts in the trust fund shall be available, as provided by appropriation acts, for the repayment of and the payment of interest on, these repayable advances.
Interest and principal are payable to the general fund of the Treasury when the Secretary of the Treasury determines that funds are available in the trust fund for such purposes.
7.) The accompanying financial statements include a liability for unemployment, disability and workers' compensation benefits payable under the provisions of the Social Security Act, the Black Lung Benefit Act and the Federal Employees' Compensation Act.
Authorized unemployment, disability and workers' compensation benefits are paid from designated funds by DOL.
Within each program, DOL recognizes a liability for certain unpaid benefits, as discussed below: (See Note 9.) The Unemployment Trust Fund, established under the authority of Section 904 of the Social Security Act of 1935, as amended, provides benefits to unemployed workers who meet State and Federal eligibility requirements.
Regular and extended unemployment benefits are paid from State accounts within the Unemployment Trust Fund, financed by a State unemployment tax on employer payrolls.
Fifty percent of the cost of extended unemployment benefits is paid from the Extended Unemployment Compensation Account within the Unemployment Trust Fund, financed by a Federal unemployment tax on employer payrolls.
Unemployment benefits to unemployed Federal workers are paid from the Federal Employee Compensation Account within the Unemployment Trust Fund.
These benefit costs are reimbursed by the responsible Federal agency.
DOL recognizes a liability for unemployment benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
DOL recognizes a liability for Federal employees' unemployment benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits for existing claims filed during the current period, payable in the subsequent period.
The Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, established under the authority of the Black Lung Benefit Act, provides for compensation and medical benefits for eligible coal miners who are disabled due to pneumoconiosis (black lung disease).
DOL recognizes a liability for disability benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
The Federal Employees' (Workers') Compensation Special Benefit Fund, established under the authority of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA), provides income and medical cost protection to covered Federal civilian employees injured on the job, employees who have incurred a work-related occupational disease and beneficiaries of employees whose death is attributable to a job-related injury or occupational disease.
The fund is reimbursed by other Federal agencies for the FECA benefit payments made on behalf of their workers.
A liability for workers' compensation benefits payable by the Special Benefit Fund to the employees of other Federal agencies is accrued to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
The fund also provides 50% of the annual cost-of-living adjustments for pre-1972 compensation cases under the authority of Section 10(h) of the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act and the District of Columbia Workmen's Compensation Act.
DOL recognizes a liability for 10(h) payments to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
The accompanying financial statements include a liability for future workers' compensation benefits payable by DOL to its employees, to employees of the Panama Canal Commission and to enrollees of the Job Corps, as well as a liability for future workers' compensation benefits payable by the Special Benefit Fund which are not chargeable to other Federal agencies.
The Special Benefit Fund assumes a liability for nonchargeable FECA benefits equal to the projected gross liability for future FECA benefits for all Federal agencies less the reserve credits to be charged back to those agencies.
The liability includes the expected liability for death, disability, medical and other approved costs, and is determined using the paid-loss extrapolation method.
This methodology uses historical benefit payment patterns related to a specific incurred period to yield projected annual benefit payments.
The methodology provides for the effects of inflation by applying wage inflation factors (cost of living adjustments or COLAs) and medical inflation factors (consumer price index medical or CPIMs) to the calculation of projected future benefits.
These factors were also used to adjust the methodology's historical payments to current year constant dollars.
Thirteen compensation payments were assumed to be made per year, projected over 37 years.
The COLAs and CPIMs used in the projections are shown below.
The projected annual benefit payments have been discounted to present value.
The interest rate utilized for discounting was 5.60%.
See Note 10.)
New regulations that became effective on January 4, 1999 contain revisions to medical fee schedules and other pay provisions.
These new regulations may reduce the projected liability for future FECA benefits in subsequent years.
A liability for annual and compensatory leave is accrued as leave is earned and paid when leave is taken.
At year end, leave balances are revalued to reflect current wages.
The balance of leave earned but not taken will be paid from future funding sources.
Sick leave and other types of nonvested leave are expensed as taken.
DOL employees are eligible to participate in the contributory Federal Employees Health Benefit Program (FEHBP) and the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Program (FEGLIP).
DOL makes matching contributions to the FEHBP and FEGLIP on behalf of active employees to pay for current benefits.
These contributions are recognized as current operating expenses.
During 1998, DOL's contributions to the FEHBP and FEGLIP were $37.1 and $1.5 million, respectively.
DOL employees participate in either the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) or the Federal Employees' Retirement System (FERS), implemented on January 1, 1987.
For employees participating in CSRS, DOL withholds 7.00% of their gross earnings.
DOL contributes an additional 8.51% of employee gross earnings, and the total of employee withholdings and DOL contributions is transferred to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund.
For employees in FERS, DOL withholds 0.8% of gross earnings, and matches the withholding with an 10.7% contribution.
This total is transferred to the Federal Employees' Retirement Fund.
The CSRS and FERS retirement funds are administered by the OPM.
DOL contributions to the CSRS and FERS are recognized as operating expenses.
FERS participants are also covered under the Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) and are subject to FICA withholdings.
DOL makes matching contributions to FICA, recognized as operating expenses.
DOL's contributions were $22.4 million during 1998.
On April 1, 1987, the Federal government initiated the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP), which is a defined contribution retirement savings and investment plan for employees covered by either FERS or CSRS.
For employees covered under FERS, DOL contributes to the TSP an amount equal to 1% of the employees' pay.
FERS participants may contribute up to 10% of their gross pay to the TSP.
DOL matches 100% of the first 3% contributed and 50% of the next 2% contributed.
CSRS participants may contribute up to 5% of their gross pay to the TSP, but there is no departmental matching contribution.
The maximum amount that either FERS or CSRS employees may contribute to the TSP in a calendar year is $10,000.
DOL contributions to the TSP are recognized as operating expenses.
The total of employee and departmental contributions is transferred to the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board.
Stewardship investments are made by DOL for the benefit of the nation.
For accounting purposes, these investments are expensed as incurred, and reflected in the net cost of DOL's operations.
However, stewardship investments provide long term benefits which cannot be measured in traditional financial reports.
DOL's stewardship investments are in human capital, reported as expenses in the net cost of DOL's employment and training programs.
These investments are intended to maintain or increase national economic productive capacity, as demonstrated by program outputs and outcomes.
Within DOL, the Employment and Training Administration and the Veterans' Employment and Training Service administer programs which invest in human capital, as discussed below: The U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration's (ETA) Federal investment in human capital comprises expenses incurred for education and training programs enacted under the Job Training Partnership Act, as amended (JTPA) and the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (Trade Act).
This investment is made for the general public and the expenses incurred are intended to increase or maintain national economic productive capacity.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 1998, the ETA incurred expenses in nominal dollars totaling $5,127,269,133, excluding the cost of internal Federal education and training.
A brief description of the programs is as follows: * Adult Employment and Training - Grants to provide financial assistance to States and U.S. territories to design and operate training programs for low income adults.
Dislocated Worker Employment and Training - Grants to provide re-employment services and retraining assistance to individuals dislocated from their employment.
Youth Training - Grants to provide financial assistance to States and U.S. territories to design and operate training programs for economically disadvantaged youth.
Summer Youth Employment and Training - Grants to operate programs of employment and opportunities, as well as academic enrichment for economically disadvantaged youth during the summer months.
School-To-Work Opportunities - Grants to States and localities, jointly administered by the DOL and U.S. Department of Education to build systems that provide youth with the knowledge and skills necessary to make an effective transition from school to careers through work-based learning, school-based education, and connecting activities.
Native Americans - Grants to Indian tribes and other Native American groups to provide training, work experience, and other employment-related services to Native Americans.
The mission of Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) is to help veterans, Reservists, and National Guard members secure employment and the rights and benefits associated with those programs.
Services provided are consistent with the changing needs of employers and the eligible veterans' population, with priority given to disabled veterans and other veterans with significant disadvantages in the labor market.
VETS can be broken down into two main areas, Employment Services and Transition and Reemployment Services.
Brief descriptions follow: The Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP) was first established by Executive Order in 1977.
It was later authorized by the Veterans' Rehabilitation and Education Amendments of 1980 Public Law (P.L.) 96-466 and is codified at Section 4102A of Title 38, United States Code.
DVOP grants are made to State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs) according to the distribution formula prescribed by law and administrative regulations.
DVOP staff provided counseling, assessment and lifelong learning skills for veterans and or referral to training.
The Local Veterans' Employment Representative (LVER) program was first authorized under the original "GI Bill," the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944; P.L. 78-346.
As amended by P.L. 100-323 and more recently by P.L. 102-16, it is codified at Section 4104 of Title 38, United States Code.
The program provides grants to SESAs for the appointment of LVER staff positions identified in Job Service local offices to enhance the services provided to veterans through oversight, technical support, and direct provision of services.
LVER staff helped veterans into productive employment through lifelong learning services and provided direct assistance to individuals seeking their help.
In November 1990, with the enactment of Public Law 101-510, the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) was authorized as a permanent program under Title 10, United States Code, Chapter 58, Section 1144.
TAP operates as a partnership between the Departments of Labor, Defense, and Veterans Affairs.
This partnership also exists at the local level, where memoranda of understanding spell out the responsibilities of SESAs, military installations, VETS staff and VA facilities.
The program provides separating service members, their spouses or individuals retiring from military service with career counseling and training on becoming productive members of society through employment.
The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA or the Act) was signed into law on October 13, 1994.
This Act is codified at Title 38, Chapter 43, United States Code.
USERRA is a complete revision of the predecessor Veterans' Reemployment Rights law.
USERRA continues to protect civilian job rights and benefits for veterans, members of the National Guard and Reserves.
The VETS intervention educates both employee and employer so they better understand the rights of the individuals and promotes a more productive relationship between employer and employee.
The U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration (ETA) maintains ninety-seven (97) Job Corps centers located throughout the United States.
Funding constraints may limit the extent of maintenance undertaken during each fiscal year.
Consequently, maintenance projects are not always performed as scheduled and, therefore, must be deferred to a future period.
Information on deferred maintenance is based on condition assessment surveys that are conducted every three years at each Job Corps center to determine the current condition of facilities and the estimated cost to correct deficiencies.
The principal Statement of Budgetary Resources consolidates the availability, status and outlay of DOL's budgetary resources during FY 1998.
Presented on the following pages is the disaggregation of this consolidated information for each of the Department's major budget accounts.
Franchise and intragovernmental support revolving funds not separately reported on the principal financial statements are required to report certain supplementary information.
The Department of Labor's Working Capital Fund qualifies under this definition.
Required supplementary information for the Working Capital Fund is presented below.
The WCF was established to provide budget authority, without fiscal year limitation, for expenses necessary to providing certain centralized services and activities to agencies within DOL.
These agencies are identified in the condensed financial information The Fund is an Intra-governmental Revolving Fund, authorized specifically by law to finance a cycle of operations in which Fund expenditures generate receipts which are available to the Fund for continuing use without annual re-authorization by Congress.
The Fund provides services on a centralized basis for the following Departmental activities: The activities are provided under the overall direction of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management.
The WCF advisory committee assists in reviewing overall procedures, systems, and regulations as well as programs, functions, and activities performed and financed through the WCF.
The WCF advisory committee is chaired by the Acting Chief Financial Officer and consists of the Agency Financial Manager for each DOL agency, or a formally designated alternate.
The Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) has classified certain government income transfer programs as social insurance programs.
Recognizing that these programs have complex characteristics that do not fit traditional accounting models, the FASAB is developing accounting standards for social insurance programs which require the presentation of supplementary information to facilitate the assessment of the program's long term sustainability.
The U.S. Department of Labor operates two programs classified under Federal accounting standards as social insurance programs, the Unemployment Insurance Program and the Black Lung Disability Benefits Program.
Presented below is the supplementary information for the two programs.
The Unemployment Insurance (UI) Program was created in 1935 to provide income assistance to unemployed workers who have lost their jobs through no fault of their own.
The program protects workers during temporary periods of unemployment through the provision of unemployment compensation benefits.
These benefits replace part of the unemployed worker's lost wages and, in so doing, stabilize the economy during recessionary periods by increasing the unemployed's purchasing power.
The UI program operates counter cyclically, with benefits exceeding tax collections during recessionary periods and UI tax revenues exceeding benefit payments during periods of recovery.
The UI program is administered through a unique system of Federal-State partnerships, established in Federal law but executed through conforming State laws by State officials.
The Federal government provides broad policy guidance and program direction through the oversight of the U.S. Department of Labor, while program details are established through individual State UI statutes, administered through State UI agencies.
The UI program is financed through the collection of Federal and State unemployment taxes levied on subject employers and deposited in the Unemployment Trust Fund (UTF).
The UTF was established to account for the receipt, investment and disbursement of unemployment taxes.
Federal unemployment taxes are used to pay for the administrative costs of the UI program, including grants to each State to cover the costs of State UI operations and the Federal share of extended UI benefits.
Federal unemployment taxes are also used to maintain a loan account within the UTF, from which insolvent States may borrow funds to pay UI benefits.
State UI taxes are used exclusively for the payment of regular UI benefits, as well as the State's share of extended benefits.
Under the provisions of the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA), a Federal tax is levied on covered employers, at a current rate of 6.2% of the first $7,000 in annual wages paid to each employee.
This Federal tax rate is reduced by a credit of up to 5.4%, granted to employers paying State UI taxes under conforming State UI statutes.
Accordingly, in conforming States, employers pay an effective Federal tax of 0.8%.
Federal unemployment taxes are collected by the Internal Revenue Service.
In addition to the Federal tax, individual States finance their UI programs through State tax contributions from subject employers based on the wages of covered employees.
Three States also collect contributions from employees).
Within Federal confines, State tax rates are assigned in accordance with an employer's experience with unemployment.
Actual tax rates vary greatly among the States and among individual employers within a State.
At a minimum, these rates must be applied to the Federal tax base of $7,000; however, States may adopt a higher wage base than the minimum established by FUTA.
State UI agencies are responsible for the collection of State unemployment taxes.
Federal and State UI taxes are deposited into designated accounts within the Unemployment Trust Fund.
The UTF was established under the authority of Title IX, Section 904 of the Social Security Act of 1935, as amended, to receive, hold, invest, loan and disburse Federal and State UI taxes.
The U.S. Department of the Treasury acts as custodian over monies deposited into the UTF, investing amounts in excess of disbursing requirements in Treasury securities.
The UTF is comprised of the following accounts: The Employment Security Administration Account (ESAA) was established pursuant to Section 901 of the Act.
All tax receipts collected under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) are appropriated to the ESAA and used to pay the costs of Federal and State administration of the unemployment insurance program and veterans employment services, as well as 97 percent of the costs of the State employment services.
Excess balances in ESAA, as defined under the Act, are transferred to other Federal accounts within the Fund, as described below.
The Federal Unemployment Account (FUA) was established pursuant to Section 904 of the Act.
FUA is funded by any excesses from the ESAA as determined in accordance with Section 902 of the Act.
Title XII, Section 1201 of the Act authorizes the FUA to loan Federal monies to State accounts that are unable to make benefit payments because the State UI account balance has been exhausted.
Title XII loans must be repaid with interest.
The FUA may borrow from the ESAA or EUCA, without interest, or may also receive repayable advances, with interest, from the general fund of the U.S. Treasury, when the FUA has a balance insufficient to make advances to the States.
The Extended Unemployment Compensation Account (EUCA) was established pursuant to Section 905 of the Act.
EUCA provides for the payment of extended unemployment benefits authorized under the Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970, as amended.
Under the extended benefits program, extended unemployment benefits are paid to individuals who have exhausted their regular unemployment benefits.
These extended benefits are financed one-half by State unemployment taxes and one-half by Federal taxes from the EUCA.
The EUCA is funded by a percentage of the FUTA tax transferred from the ESAA in accordance with Section 905(b)(1) and (2) of the Act.
The EUCA may borrow from the ESAA or the FUA, without interest, or may also receive repayable advances from the general fund of the Treasury when the EUCA has a balance insufficient to pay the Federal share of extended benefits.
During periods of sustained high unemployment, the EUCA may also receive payments and non-repayable advances from the general fund of the Treasury to finance emergency unemployment compensation benefits.
Emergency unemployment benefits require Congressional authorization.
The Federal Employees Compensation Account (FECA) was established pursuant to Section 909 of the Act.
The FEC Account provides funds to States for unemployment compensation benefits paid to eligible former Federal civilian personnel and ex-service members.
Generally, benefits paid are reimbursed to the Federal Employees Compensation Account by the various Federal agencies.
Any additional resources necessary to assure that the account can make the required payments to States, due to the timing of the benefit payments and subsequent reimbursements, will be provided by non-repayable advances from the general fund of the Treasury.
Separate State Accounts were established for each State and territory depositing monies into the Fund, in accordance with Section 904 of the Act.
State unemployment taxes are deposited into these individual accounts and may be used only to pay State unemployment benefits.
States may receive repayable advances from the FUA when their balances in the Fund are insufficient to pay benefits.
The Railroad UI Account and Railroad UI Administrative Account were established under Section 904 of the Act to provide for a separate unemployment insurance program for railroad employees.
This separate unemployment insurance program is administered by the Railroad Retirement Board, an agency independent of DOL.
DOL is not responsible for the administrative oversight or solvency of the railroad unemployment insurance system.
Receipts from taxes on railroad payrolls are deposited in the Railroad UI Account and the Railroad UI Administrative Account to meet benefit payment and related administrative expenses.
The UI program provides regular and extended benefits payable to eligible unemployed workers.
Regular UI program benefits are established under State law, payable for a period not to exceed a maximum duration.
In 1970, Federal law began to require States to extend this maximum period of benefit duration by fifty percent, during periods of high unemployment.
These extended benefit payments are paid equally from Federal and State accounts.
There are no Federal standards regarding eligibility, amount or duration of regular UI benefits.
Eligibility requirements, as well as benefit amounts and benefit duration are determined under State law.
Under State laws, worker eligibility for benefits depends on experience in covered employment during a past base period, which attempts to measure the workers' recent attachment to the labor force.
Three factors are common to State eligibility requirements: (1) a minimum duration of recent employment and earnings during a base period prior to unemployment, (2) unemployment not the fault of the unemployed, and (3) availability of the unemployed for work.
Benefit payment amounts under all State laws vary with the worker's base period wage history.
Generally, States compute the amount of weekly UI benefits as a percentage of an individual's average weekly base period earnings, within certain minimum and maximum limits.
Most States set the duration of UI benefits by the amount of earnings an individual has received during the base period.
Currently, all States have established the maximum duration for regular UI benefits at 26 weeks.
Regular UI benefits are paid by the State UI agencies from monies drawn down from the State's account within the Unemployment Trust Fund.
The Federal/State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970 provides for the extension of the duration of UI benefits during periods of high unemployment.
When the insured unemployment level within a State, or in some cases total unemployment, reaches certain specified levels, the State must extend benefit duration by fifty percent, up to a combined maximum of 39 weeks.
Fifty percent of the cost of extended unemployment benefits is paid from the Extended Unemployment Compensation Account within the UTF, and fifty percent by the State, from the State's UTF account.
During prolonged periods of high unemployment, Congress may authorize the payment of emergency unemployment benefits to supplement extended UI benefit payments.
Emergency benefits were last authorized in 1991 under the Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act.
Emergency benefit payments in excess of $28 billion were paid over the three year period ending in 1994.
Emergency benefits were paid from the surplus of Federal unemployment taxes in EUCA, and, once EUCA balances were exhausted, from general revenues of the U.S. Treasury.
Unemployment benefits to unemployed Federal workers are paid from the Federal Employment Compensation Account within the Unemployment Trust Fund.
These benefit costs are reimbursed by the responsible Federal agency and are not considered to be social insurance benefits.
Federal unemployment compensation benefits are not included in this discussion of social insurance programs.
At September 30, 1998, total assets within the UTF exceeded liabilities by $71.0 billion.
This fund balance approximates the accumulated surplus of tax revenues and earnings on these revenues over benefit payment expenses and is available to finance benefit payments in future periods when tax revenues may be insufficient.
Treasury invests this accumulated surplus in Federal securities.
The net value of these securities at September 30, 1998 was $70.6 billion.
These investments accrue interest, which is distributed to eligible State and Federal accounts within the UTF.
Interest income from these investments during FY 1998 was $4.5 billion.
Federal and State UI tax and reimbursable revenues of $27.4 billion and regular and extended benefit payment expense of $19.5 billion were recognized for the year ended September 30, 1998.
As discussed in Note 1.M.1 to the consolidated financial statements, DOL recognized a liability for regular and extended unemployment benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
Accrued unemployment benefits payable at September 30, 1998 were $514.0 million.
The ability of the UI program to meet a participant's future benefit payment needs depends on the availability of accumulated taxes and earnings within the UTF.
The Department measures the effect of projected benefit payments on the accumulated net assets of the UTF, under an open group scenario, which includes current and future participants in the UI program.
Future estimated cash inflows and outflows of the UTF are tracked by the Department for budgetary purposes.
These projections allow the Department to monitor the sensitivity of the UI program to differing economic conditions, and to predict the program's sustainability under varying economic assumptions.
Presented on the following pages is the effect of projected economic conditions on the net assets of the UTF, excluding the Federal Employees Compensation Account.
Charts I and II graphically depict the effect of expected economic conditions on the UTF over the next ten years.
Chart I depicts projected cash inflows and outflows of the UTF over the next ten years, under expected economic conditions.
Total cash inflows as well as cash inflows excluding interest earnings are displayed.
Current estimates by the Department are based on an expected unemployment rate of 4.90% during FY 1999, increasing to 5.40% in FY 2002 and thereafter.
These projections, excluding interest earnings, indicate net cash inflows through FY 2001, with a crossover to net outflows in FY 2002.
Cash inflows combined with interest earnings exceed cash outflows for each of the ten years presented, although this net excess decreases from $7.9 billion at the end of FY 1999 to $2.2 billion at the end of FY 2008.
Charts III and IV demonstrate the effect on accumulated UTF assets of projected total cash inflows and cash outflows of the UTF over the ten year period ending September 30, 2008, under moderate and severe recession scenarios.
Each scenario uses an open group, which includes current and future participants in the UI program.
Charts III and IV assume increased rates of unemployment during mild and deep periods of recession.
The Department projects the effect of moderate recession on the cash inflows and outflows of the UTF.
Under this scenario, which utilizes a rising unemployment rate peaking at 7.32% in FY 2002, net cash outflows are projected to begin in FY 2001, increasing to a maximum of $6.6 billion in FY 2002.
Net cash inflows are reestablished in FY 2004 with a drop in the unemployment rate to 6.32%.
The Department also estimates the effect of severe recession on the cash inflows and outflows of the UTF.
This scenario assumes a rising unemployment rate peaking at 10.15% in FY 2003.
Under this scenario, net cash outflows are projected to begin early in FY 2000, increasing to $21.9 billion in FY 2003.
During this four-year period the net assets of the UTF decrease from $71.9 billion to $20.6 billion, a decline of $51.3 billion (71%).
While aggregate UTF balances remain positive, State accounts without sufficient reserve balances to absorb negative cash flows would be forced to borrow funds from the FUA to meet benefit payment requirements.
State borrowing demands could also deplete the FUA, which borrows from the ESAA and the EUCA until they were depleted.
The FUA would then require advances from the general fund of the U.S. Treasury to provide for State borrowings.
See discussion of State solvency measures following.)
Net cash inflows are reestablished early in FY 2004, with a drop in the unemployment rate to 7.82%.
By the end of FY 2008, this positive cash flow has replenished UTF account balances to $78.2 billion, or more than $1.6 billion higher than the FY 1999 peak.
This example demonstrates the counter cyclical nature of the UI program, which experiences net cash outflows during periods of recession, to be replenished through net cash inflows during periods of recovery.
Chart IV Tables containing the total yearly cash inflow, interest earnings and cash outflow for each scenario are presented in the following pages.
Another measure of the sufficiency of accumulated UTF assets to meet benefit future benefit payment requirements analyzes the adequacy of each State's accumulated net assets or reserve balance to provide a defined level of benefits over a defined period of time.
To be considered minimally solvent, a State's reserve balance should provide for one year's projected benefit payment needs based on the highest level of benefit payments experienced by the State.
A ratio of 1.0 or greater indicates a state is minimally solvent.
States below this level are the most vulnerable to exhausting their funds in a recession.
States exhausting their reserve balance must borrow funds from the Federal Unemployment Account (FUA) to make benefit payments.
During periods of high sustained unemployment, balances in the FUA may be depleted.
In these circumstances, FUA is authorized to borrow from the Treasury general fund.
Chart V presents the State by State results of this analysis at September 30, 1998, in descending order, by ratio.
As the table illustrates, 20 states failed to maintain minimal solvency ratios at September 30, 1998.
The Black Lung Disability Benefit Program provides for compensation, medical and survivor benefits for eligible coal miners who are disabled due to pneumoconiosis (black lung disease) arising out of their coal mine employment.
The U.S. Department of Labor operates the Black Lung Disability Benefit Program.
The Black Lung Disability Trust Fund (BLDTF) provides benefit payments to eligible coal miners disabled by pneumoconiosis, when no responsible mine operator can be assigned the liability.
Black lung disability benefit payments are funded by excise taxes from coal mine operators based on the sale of coal, as are the fund's administrative costs.
These taxes are collected by the Internal Revenue Service and transferred to the BLDTF, which was established under the authority of the Black Lung Benefits Revenue Act, and administered by the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
The Black Lung Benefits Revenue Act provides for repayable advances to the BLDTF from the general fund of the Treasury, in the event that BLDTF resources are not adequate to meet program obligations.
At September 30, 1998, total liabilities of the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund exceeded assets by $5.9 billion.
This deficit fund balance represented the accumulated shortfall of excise taxes necessary to meet benefit payment and interest expenses.
This shortfall was funded by repayable advances to the BLDTF, which are repayable with interest.
Outstanding advances at September 30, 1998 were $5.9 billion, bearing interest rates ranging from 5.625 to 13.875 percent.
Excise tax revenues of $635.8 million, benefit payment expense of $451.8 million and interest expense of $494.7 million were recognized for the year ended September 30, 1998.
As discussed in Note 1.M.2, DOL recognized a liability for disability benefits to the extent of unpaid benefits applicable to the current period.
Accrued disability benefits payable at September 30, 1998 were $53.9 million.
Although no liability was recognized for future payments to be made to present and future program participants, beyond the due and payable amounts accrued at year end, future estimated cash inflows and outflows of the BLDTF are tracked by the Department for budgetary purposes.
These projections, made over the forty-two year period ending September 30, 2040, indicate that cash inflows from excise taxes will exceed cash outflows for benefit payments and administrative expenses for each period projected.
This net cash inflow is projected to reach $15.89 billion by the year 2040.
However, cash outflows, when combined with interest payments required to finance the BLDTF's repayable advances, exceed cash inflows during each of the forty two periods included in the projections.
Net cash outflows after interest payments are projected to exceed $26.6 billion by the end of the year 2040, increasing the BLDTF's deficit as of September 30, 2040 to $32.3 billion.
See Chart III on following page.)
The projected decrease in cash inflows in the year 2014 and thereafter is the result of a scheduled reduction in the tax rate on the sale of coal.
This rate reduction is projected to result in a forty nine percent decrease in the amount of excise taxes collected between the years 2013 and 2015.
The cumulative effect of this change is estimated to be in excess of $12.6 billion by the year 2040.
Yearly cash inflows and outflows are presented in the table on the following page.